of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core terms
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Stand Out of Our Light
Former Google strategist, now Oxford-trained philosopher James
Williams argues that a next-generation threat to human freedom has
emerged in the systems of intelligent persuasion that increasingly
direct our thoughts and actions. As digital technologies have made
information abundant, our attention has become the scarce resource –
and in the digital “attention economy,” technologies compete to
capture and exploit our mere attention, rather than supporting the
true goals we have for our lives. For too long, we’ve minimized the
resulting harms as “distractions” or minor annoyances. Ultimately,
however, they undermine the integrity of the human will at both
individual and collective levels. Liberating human attention from
the forces of intelligent persuasion may therefore be the deﬁning
moral and political task of the Information Age. Drawing on insights
from ancient Greece as well as Silicon Valley, Williams’s thoughtful
and impassioned analysis brings much needed clarity to one of the
most pressing questions of our time.
This title is also available as Open Access.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Stand Out of Our Light
Freedom and Resistance in the
Attention Economy
 
University of Oxford
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi – 110025, India
79 Anson Road, #06–04/06, Singapore 079906
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108429092
DOI: 10.1017/9781108453004
© James Williams 2018
This work is in copyright. It is subject to statutory exceptions
and to the provisions of relevant licensing agreements; with the exception of the Creative
Commons version the link for which is provided below, no reproduction of any part of this
work may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
An online version of this work is published at http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/9781108453004 under
a Creative Commons Open Access license CC-BY-NC 4.0 which permits reuse, distribution
and reproduction in any medium for noncommercial purposes provided appropriate credit to
the original work is given and any changes made are indicated. To view a copy of this license
visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0
All versions of this work may contain content reproduced under license from third parties.
Permission to reproduce this third-party content must be obtained from these
third-parties directly.
When citing this work, please include a reference to the DOI 10.1017/9781108453004
First published 2018
Printed in the United Kingdom by TJ International Ltd. Padstow Cornwall
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-108-42909-2 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-108-45299-1 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
For Alexander
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
It is disgraceful to be unable to use our good things.
Aristotle, Politics
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Contents
Preface
page xi
About the Nine Dots Prize
xiv
1
Philosophy for Trolls
1
Alexander the Great visits Diogenes of Sinope,
a cranky philosopher. Alexander makes a
surprise offer. Diogenes replies.
I
DISTRACTION BY DESIGN
5
2
The Faulty GPS
7
In which the author encounters new armies of
deep distraction.
3
The Age of Attention
12
Information abundance produces attention scarcity.
The world turns inside out.
4
Bring your own Boundaries
17
Digital technologies privilege our impulses over our
intentions, creating new challenges of self-regulation.
5
Empires of the Mind
26
A vast infrastructure of intelligent persuasion emerges
under our feet. It wants our attention; it is not on our side.
II
CLICKS AGAINST HUMANITY
41
6
The Citizen is the Product
43
At risk is not merely our “attention” narrowly deﬁned,
but the human will – the basis of political authority.
ix
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
7 The Spotlight
50
Redirection of thought and action in the moment.
The usual suspects of distraction.
8 The Starlight
55
The frustration of being over time. Adversarial design that
militates against our pursuit of higher goals and values.
9 The Daylight
68
The erosion of fundamental capacities necessary for
navigating human life. The ground underfoot gives way.
III
FREEDOM OF ATTENTION
85
10 The Ground of First Struggle
87
Rejecting attentional serfdom may be the deﬁning
moral and political task of our time.
11 The Monster and the Bank
97
In which pitfalls are sidestepped and misconceptions
are cleared.
12 Marginal People on Marginal Time
106
Visions of rebellion and reform. A hand-drawn map
to a place no one has ever been.
13 The Brightest Heaven of Invention
125
The music swells, the rocket lifts. A new light appears
in the sky.
Acknowledgments
129
Further Reading
131
Index
132
x
  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Preface
In order to do anything that matters, we must ﬁrst be able to give
attention to the things that matter. Doing so has never been easy, but
lately it’s become harder in new and surprising ways.
While we weren’t watching, a next generation threat to human
freedom materialized right in front of our noses. We didn’t notice it
because it came in forms that were already familiar to us. It came
bearing gifts of information, historically a scarce and valuable
resource, but delivered them in such abundance, and with such
velocity, that these gifts became a mountain of burdens. Most
disarming of all, it came to us with the promise that it was on our
side: that it was designed to help us navigate our lives in the ways we
want them to go.
Yet these little wondrous machines, for all their potential, have
not been entirely on our side. Rather than supporting our intentions,
they have largely sought to grab and keep our attention. In their
cutthroat competition against one another for the increasingly scarce
prize of “persuading” us – of shaping our thoughts and actions in
accordance with their predeﬁned goals – they have been forced to
resort to the cheapest, pettiest tricks in the book, appealing to the
lowest parts of us, to the lesser selves that our higher natures
perennially struggle to overcome. Furthermore, they now deploy in
the service of this attentional capture and exploitation the most
intelligent systems of computation the world has ever seen.
For too long, we’ve minimized the threats of this intelligent,
adversarial persuasion as mere “distraction,” or minor annoyance. In
the short term, these challenges can indeed frustrate our ability to do
the things we want to do. In the longer term, however, they can make
it harder for us to live the lives we want to live, or, even worse,
undermine fundamental capacities such as reﬂection and
xi
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
self-regulation, making it harder, in the words of philosopher
Harry Frankfurt, to “want what we want to want.” Seen in this light,
these new attentional adversaries threaten not only the success
but even the integrity of the human will, at both individual and
collective levels.
Some threats to freedom we recognize immediately; others take
time to reveal themselves for what they are. In the case of this
intelligent, adversarial persuasion that increasingly pervades human
life, the process of recognition is only beginning. The threats, by
contrast – the infrastructures and incentives that underlie their
operation – are now quite mature and deeply entrenched. As a result,
it may be too late to bring these adversarial systems onto our side.
They may now be too embedded in our lives to extricate. I do not
believe this to be the case myself – the situation is not entirely
hopeless – but the gate to salvation is narrow, and closing quickly.
I used to think there were no great political struggles left. The
truly epic defenses of freedom, I thought, had already been fought and
won by generations greater than my own, leaving to my time only the
task of dutifully administering our hard-earned political inheritance.
How wrong I was. The liberation of human attention may be the
deﬁning moral and political struggle of our time. Its success is
prerequisite for the success of virtually all other struggles. We
therefore have an obligation to rewire this system of intelligent,
adversarial persuasion before it rewires us. Doing so requires hacking
together new ways of talking and thinking about the problem, as well
as summoning the courage necessary for advancing on it in
inconvenient and unpopular ways.
In the short space of this book, my aim is to calibrate the
compass for this effort rather than draw up any detailed maps. I’ll have
more questions than answers; this will be more exploration than
argument. Read this as an unfolding of intuitions, a quest for the right
words. Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote, “sometimes a scream is better
than a thesis.” This will be a bit of both.
xii

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
The brief, yet full, time during which I have written this book
would not have been possible without the extraordinary generosity
and foresight of the Kadas Prize Foundation, Cambridge University
Press, the Centre for Research in the Arts, Social Sciences and
Humanities (CRASSH) at the University of Cambridge, and the
superhuman efforts of the Nine Dots Prize staff and board. This
privilege is only compounded by the fact that it serves to inaugurate
what will no doubt be a series of similar efforts to come. My hope is
that the present effort proves worthy of the generosity of their, and
your, attention.

xiii
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
About the Nine Dots Prize
The Nine Dots Prize was established to promote innovative
thinking on tackling problems facing the modern world. Its name,
which comes from the lateral-thinking nine dots puzzle, explains
what we were hoping would result – outside-of-the-box methods of
approaching and addressing the big issues of the day.
A new question will be posed by the Prize every other year.
In 2016, the inaugural year of the Prize, we asked the question
‘Are digital technologies making politics impossible?’
The competition was uniquely exciting in that it was judged
anonymously; the Board was tasked with selecting a winner based on
their 3,000-word response alone. All we knew about the entrants
was that they were committed to developing their ideas into a
full-length book, were they to be chosen as the Prize winner. We had
no idea whether we were reading the proposal of a teacher, a novelist,
a professor, a mechanic, a shop assistant or a lawyer, which meant
that new voices and experienced authors would be considered
alongside one another and the strongest ideas and ability to express
them would win out.
We were thrilled to receive over 700 applications, and even
more so post-judging when we discovered that our dreams of casting
the net far and wide for fresh thinking had been realised. Entrants
came from all four corners of the world, making this a truly
international venture, and worked in professions as diverse as
engineering, healthcare, media, defence, community activism and
business consultancy.
Of these several hundred proposals there were many that the
Board felt would make compelling books, but one stood above the
rest. We’re delighted to have discovered a new voice in James
Williams, a previously unpublished individual who has drawn on
xiv
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
his experiences of the tech industry and academia to write this
urgent and insightful analysis of the attention economy.
We hope that a lively public debate will follow the publication
of Stand Out of Our Light: Freedom and Resistance in the Attention
Economy. The issue it addresses is hugely important, and we’re
grateful to James for the illumination and attention he has brought
to the matter.
We also hope that you agree this is a new and thrilling way of
starting such a discussion, and that you continue to follow the Prize
as we ask more timely and incisive questions about the issues we
are facing in the world today.
Professor Simon Goldhill
Director of the Centre for Research in the Arts,
Social Sciences and Humanities (CRASSH)
at Cambridge University and Chair of the
Nine Dots Prize Board
For more about the Nine Dots Prize please visit ninedotsprize.org
    
xv
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

Philosophy for Trolls
It was a bright warm morning in Corinth in the fourth-century ,
and everything seemed normal in the market. Shoppers eyeballed the
wares of craftsmen and ﬁshmongers. Sweat and the odour of feet gave
the sea wind a sour smell. Birds cawed, waves lapped. Dogs followed
each other into those places humans do not go. The day was proving
to be plain in every way – until, all at once, a howl of Greek voices
went up in a shared cry of anger and disgust. An empty circle formed
in the crowd as shoppers began scooting back from something, or
someone. It was a beggar, lying on the ground, reclining slightly
against a big ceramic barrel he had apparently taken as his home. He
wore only a loincloth, which he had, without announcement or con-
cern, pulled aside as he began to pleasure himself in full view of the
unfortunate patrons, who were by now shufﬂing away. But anyone
who knew the man’s identity was probably unsurprised by his act,
perhaps even amused. This was no mere homeless man: this was
Diogenes of Sinope, one of the most famous philosophers in all of
Greece.
Most philosophers do not live in big ceramic barrels. But Dioge-
nes was not an ordinary philosopher, and he did not intend to become
one. Though he may never have written a single word of philosophy,
tales of his life and knowledge of his views spread far and wide. He had
no tribe or family of his own, having been exiled from his hometown
for defacing currency. Diogenes had taken a vow of poverty (hence his
residence in that big ceramic barrel), and spent much of his free time –
which was, of course, all the time – heckling and spitting at passers-
by, giving lectures to his dogs, and, of course, regaling his fellow
citizens with public displays of onanism. He would often walk around
with a lit lantern during the day, and when people would ask what he

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
was doing, he would say, “I’m looking for an honest man.” When
asked what he thought was the most beautiful thing in the world,
Diogenes replied, “Freedom of speech.” At the same time, it’s said
that he attended lectures by other luminaries of the age, including
Plato, just to disrupt them by eating loudly. He was notorious for
being offensive, impulsive, and downright rude. Diogenes’ presence
was not a safe space. Today, we would no doubt call him a “troll.”
Yet despite his notoriety, or perhaps because of it, he caught the
attention of a very powerful man: Alexander the Great, arguably the
most powerful person in the world at the time. In fact, Alexander so
admired this Greek oddity, this famed philosopher-troll, that he’s
reported to have said, “If I were not Alexander, I should wish to be
Diogenes.”1
One day, Alexander ﬁnally paid Diogenes a visit. On the day in
question, Diogenes was sunning himself in the grounds of the Cra-
neum, a gymnasium in Corinth. Alexander approached Diogenes,
ﬂanked by what must have been an imposing retinue of bodyguards,
servants, and soldiers, and fawningly expressed his admiration for this
pitiful-looking homeless man wearing only a loincloth, lying on the
ground before him. Then – perhaps it was on impulse, or perhaps it
was by design – Alexander made Diogenes a remarkable offer: he
promised to grant him any wish he desired. All Diogenes had to do
was name it, and it would be done.
The air must have been thick with anticipation. How would
Diogenes respond? Any offer, even a very good one, imposes an obliga-
tion on the person receiving it. This includes, at minimum, an obligation
to perform one’s gratefulness for having been offered anything at all,
even if the offer is ultimately declined. However, even though he was a
beggar, Diogenes was not really the grateful type. How, then, would he
reply? Would he ﬁnally drop his trollish persona in the face of this life-
changing offer? Would Diogenes ask Alexander to annul his exile from
Sinope so he could return to his hometown after all these years? Or
might he decline to consider Alexander’s offer at all? Would the cranky
philosopher-troll even bother to respond?

    
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
But Diogenes did respond. He looked up, gestured at Alexander,
and barked, “Stand out of my light!”2
At the dawn of the twenty-ﬁrst century, a new set of wondrous,
designed forces – our information and communication technologies –
has transformed human life. Our moment-to-moment experiences,
our interactions with one another, the styles of our thoughts and the
habits of our days now take their shapes, in large part, from the
operation of these new inventions. Their inner workings are, for many
of us, sufﬁciently obscure that they seem indistinguishable from
magic; we are happy to be astonished by their novelty and power.
And with our admiration comes a trust; that these inventions are, as
their creators claim, built to follow our guiding lights, to help us
navigate our lives in the ways we want them to go. We trust these
wondrous inventions to be on our side.
In Alexander’s offer to Diogenes we can detect a certain imper-
ial optimism that is familiar to us from the way these young powers of
our time, our digital Alexanders, have similarly come into our lives
and offered to fulﬁll all manner of needs and wishes. Of course, in
many ways they have fulﬁlled our needs and wishes, and in many
ways they have been on our side. They have profoundly enhanced our
ability to inform ourselves, to communicate with one another, and to
understand our world. Today, with a thin plastic slab the size of my
hand, I can chat with my family in Seattle, instantly read any Shake-
speare play, or ﬁre off a message to my elected representatives, regard-
less of where in the world I am.
And yet, as these new powers have become ever more central to
our thought and action, we’ve begun to realize that they, like Alexan-
der to Diogenes, have also been standing in our light, in a sense – and
in one light in particular: a light so precious and central to human
ﬂourishing that without it all their other beneﬁts may do us
little good.
That light is the light of our attention. Something deep and
potentially irreversible seems to be happening to human attention
  

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
in the age of information. Responding to it well may be the biggest
moral and political challenge of our time. My purpose here is to tell
you why I think so – and to ask for your help in keeping this
light lit.

1 Diogenes Laertius vi. 32; Arrian VII.2.
2 Diogenes Laertius vi. 38; Arrian VII.2.

    
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

Distraction by Design
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

The Faulty GPS
Five years ago I was working for Google and advancing a mission that
I still admire for its audacity of scope: “to organize the world’s infor-
mation and make it universally accessible and useful.”1 But one day
I had an epiphany: there was more technology in my life than ever
before, but it felt harder than ever to do the things I wanted to do.
I felt . . . distracted. But it was more than just “distraction” –
this was some new mode of deep distraction I didn’t have words for.
Something was shifting on a level deeper than mere annoyance, and
its disruptive effects felt far more perilous than the usual surface-level
static we expect from day-to-day life. It felt like something disinte-
grating, decohering: as though the ﬂoor was crumbling under my feet,
and my body was just beginning to realize it was falling. I felt the story
of my life being compromised in some fuzzy way I couldn’t articulate.
The matter of my world seemed to be sublimating into thin air. Does
that even make sense? It didn’t at the time.
Whatever it was, this deep distraction seemed to have the exact
opposite effect of the one technology is supposed to have on our lives.
More and more, I found myself asking the question, “What was all
this technology supposed to be doing for me?”
Think for a moment about the goals you have for yourself: your goals
for reading this book, for later today, for this week, even for later this
year and beyond. If you’re like most people, they’re probably goals like
“learn how to play piano,” “spend more time with family,” “plan that
trip I’ve been meaning to take,” and so on. These are real goals,
human goals. They’re the kinds of goals that, when we’re on our
deathbeds, we’ll regret not having achieved. If technology is for any-
thing, it’s for helping us pursue these kinds of goals.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
A few years ago I read an article called “Regrets of the Dying.”2
It was about a businesswoman whose disillusionment with the day-
to-day slog of her trade had led her to leave it, and to start working in a
very different place: in rooms where people were dying. She spent her
days attending to their needs and listening to their regrets, and she
recorded the most common things they wished they’d done, or hadn’t
done, in life: they’d worked too hard, they hadn’t told people how they
felt, they hadn’t let themselves be happy, and so on. This, it seems to
me, is the proper perspective – the one that’s truly our own, if any
really is. It’s the perspective that our screens and machines ought to
help us circle back on, again and again: because whatever we might
choose to want, nobody chooses to want to regret.
Think back on your goals from a moment ago. Now try to
imagine what your technologies’ goals are for you. What do you think
they are? I don’t mean the companies’ mission statements and high-
ﬂying marketing messages – I mean the goals on the dashboards in
their product design meetings, the metrics they’re using to deﬁne
what success means for your life. How likely do you think it is that
they reﬂect the goals you have for yourself?
Not very likely, sorry to say. Instead of your goals, success from
their perspective is usually deﬁned in the form of low-level
“engagement” goals, as they’re often called. These include things like
maximizing the amount of time you spend with their product, keep-
ing you clicking or tapping or scrolling as much as possible, or show-
ing you as many pages or ads as they can. A peculiar quirk of the
technology industry is its ability to drain words of their deeper mean-
ings; “engagement” is one such word. (Incidentally, it’s ﬁtting that
this term can also refer to clashes between armies: here, the “engage-
ment” is fundamentally adversarial as well.)
But these “engagement” goals are petty, subhuman goals. No
person has these goals for themselves. No one wakes up in the morn-
ing and asks, “How much time can I possibly spend using social media
today?” (If there is someone like that, I’d love to meet them and
understand their mind.)

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
What this means, though, is that there’s a deep misalignment
between the goals we have for ourselves and the goals our technolo-
gies have for us. This seems to me to be a really big deal, and one that
nobody talks about nearly enough. We trust these technologies to be
companion systems for our lives: we trust them to help us do the
things we want to do, to become the people we want to be.
In a sense, our information technologies ought to be GPSes
for our lives. (Sure, there are times when we don’t know exactly where
we want to go in life. But in those cases, technology’s job is to help us
ﬁgure out what our destination is, and to do so in the way we want to
ﬁgure it out.) But imagine if your actual GPS was adversarial against
you in this way. Imagine that you’ve just purchased a new one,
installed it in your car, and on the ﬁrst use it guides you efﬁciently to
the right place. On the second trip, however, it takes you to an address
several streets away from your intended destination. It’s probably just a
random glitch, you think, or maybe it needs a map update. So you give
it little thought. But on the third trip, you’re shocked when you ﬁnd
yourself miles away from your desired endpoint, which is now on the
opposite side of town. These errors continue to mount, and they frus-
trate you so much that you give up and decide to return home. But then,
when you enter your home address, the system gives you a route that
would have you drive for hours and end up in a totally different city.
Any reasonable person would consider this GPS faulty and
return it to the store, if not chuck it out their car window. Who would
continue to put up with a device they knew would take them some-
where other than where they wanted to go? What reasons could
anyone possibly have for continuing to tolerate such a thing?
No one would put up with this sort of distraction from a tech-
nology that directs them through physical space. Yet we do precisely
this, on a daily basis, when it comes to the technologies that direct us
through informational space. We have a curiously high tolerance for
poor navigability when it comes to the GPSes for our lives – the
information and communication systems that now direct so much
of our thought and action.
  

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
When I looked around the technology industry, I began to see with
new eyes the dashboards, the metrics, and the goals that were driving
much of its design. These were the destinations we were entering into
the GPSes guiding the lives of millions of human beings. I tried
imagining my life reﬂected in the primary color numbers increment-
ing on screens around me: Number of Views, Time on Site, Number of
Clicks, Total Conversions. Suddenly, these goals seemed petty and
perverse. They were not my goals – or anyone else’s.
I soon came to understand that the cause in which I’d been
conscripted wasn’t the organization of information at all, but of
attention. The technology industry wasn’t designing products; it
was designing users. These magical, general-purpose systems weren’t
neutral “tools”; they were purpose-driven navigation systems guiding
the lives of ﬂesh-and-blood humans. They were extensions of our
attention. The Canadian media theorist Harold Innis once said that
his entire career’s work proceeded from the question, “Why do we
attend to the things to which we attend?”3 I realized that I’d been
woefully negligent in asking this question about my own attention.
But I also knew this wasn’t just about me – my deep
distractions, my frustrated goals. Because when most people in soci-
ety use your product, you aren’t just designing users; you’re designing
society. But if all of society were to become as distracted in this new,
deep way as I was starting to feel, what would that mean? What would
be the implications for our shared interests, our common purposes,
our collective identities, our politics?
In 1985 the educator and media critic Neil Postman wrote
Amusing Ourselves to Death, a book that’s become more relevant
and prescient with each passing day.4 In its foreword, Postman recalls
Aldous Huxley’s observation from Brave New World Revisited that
the defenders of freedom in his time had “failed to take into
account . . . man’s almost inﬁnite appetite for distractions.”5 Postman
contrasts the indirect, persuasive threats to human freedom that
Huxley warns about in Brave New World with the direct, coercive sort
of threats on which George Orwell focuses in Nineteen Eighty-Four.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Huxley’s foresight, Postman writes, lay in his prediction that free-
dom’s nastiest adversaries in the years to come would emerge not
from the things we fear, but from the things that give us pleasure: it’s
not the prospect of a “boot stamping on a human face – forever” that
should keep us up at night, but rather the specter of a situation in
which “people will come to love their oppression, to adore the tech-
nologies that undo their capacities to think.”6 A thumb scrolling
through an inﬁnite feed, forever.
I wondered whether, in the design of digital technologies, we’d
made the same mistake as Huxley’s contemporaries: I wondered
whether we’d failed to take into account our “almost inﬁnite appetite
for distractions.” I didn’t know the answer, but I felt the question
required urgent, focused attention.

1 Google (2017). Our Company. www.google.com/intl/en/about/our-
company/
Note: All the web pages referenced herein were accessed within the period
November 1–December 31, 2017.
2 Ware, Bronnie (2009). Regrets of the Dying. www.bronnieware.com/blog/
regrets-of-the-dying
3 Innis, Harold A. (2008). The Bias of Communication. University of
Toronto Press.
4 Books I refer to often are included in the Further Reading list at the end of
this book.
5 Huxley, Aldous (1985). Brave New World Revisited. New York, NY:
Harper & Brothers.
6 Postman, Neil (1987). Amusing Ourselves to Death. Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
  

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

The Age of Attention
To see what is in front of one’s nose needs a constant struggle.
Orwell
When I told my mother I was moving to the other side of the planet to
study technology ethics at a school that’s almost three times as old as
my country, she asked, “Why would you go somewhere so old to
study something so new?” In a way, the question contained its own
answer. Working in the technology industry, I felt, was akin to
climbing a mountain, and that’s one way – a very up-close and
hands-on way – to get to know a mountain. But if you want to see
its shape, paint its proﬁle, understand its relations with the wider
geography – to do that, you have to go a few miles away and look
back. I felt that my inquiry into the faulty GPSes of my life required
this move. I needed distance, not only physical but also temporal and
ultimately critical, from the windy yet intriguing cliffs of the technol-
ogy industry. “Amongst the rocks one cannot stop or think.”1 Some-
times, the struggle to see what’s in front of your nose is a struggle to
get away from it so you can see it as a whole.
I soon found that my quest to gain distance from the mountain
of the technology industry was paralleling, and in many ways enab-
ling, a more general quest to gain distance from the assumptions of
the Information Age altogether. I suspect that no one living in a
named age – the Bronze Age, the Iron Age – ever called it by the name
we give it now. They no doubt used other names rooted in assump-
tions of their times that they could not imagine would ever be over-
turned. So it’s always both bemused and annoyed me, in roughly equal
measure, that we so triumphantly call our time the “Information
Age.” Information is the water in which we swim; we perceive it to
be the raw material of the human experience. So the dominant

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
metaphor for the human is now the computer, and we interpret the
challenges of our world primarily in terms of the management of
information.
This is, of course, the standard way people talk about digital
technologies: it’s assumed that information is fundamentally what
they’re managing, manipulating, and moving around. For example,
ten seconds before I started writing this sentence my wife walked into
the room and said, “I just heard the internet described on the radio as
‘a conveyor belt of fraudulent information.’” Every day, we hear
dozens of remarks like this: on the radio, in the newspaper, and in
conversations with others. We instinctively frame issues pertaining to
digital technologies in informational terms, which means that the
political and ethical challenges we end up worrying about most of
the time also involve the management of information: privacy, secur-
ity, surveillance, and so on.
This is understandable. For most of human history, we’ve lived
in environments of information scarcity. In those contexts, the impli-
cit goal of information technologies has been to break down the
barriers between us and information. Because information was scarce,
any new piece of it represented a novel addition to your life. You had
plenty of capacity to attend to it and integrate it into your general
picture of the world. For example, a hundred years ago you could stand
on a street corner in a city and start preaching, and people would
probably stop and listen. They had the time and attention to spare.
And because information has historically been scarce, the received
wisdom has been that more information is better. The advent of
digital computing, however, broke down the barriers between us and
information to an unprecedented degree.
Yet, as the noted economist Herbert Simon pointed out in the
1970s, when information becomes abundant, attention becomes the
scarce resource:
in an information-rich world, the wealth of information means a
dearth of something else: a scarcity of whatever it is that
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
information consumes. What information consumes is rather
obvious: it consumes the attention of its recipients. Hence a wealth
of information creates a poverty of attention and a need to allocate
that attention efﬁciently among the overabundance of information
sources that might consume it.2
Since Simon’s time, the ubiquity of small, constantly connected,
general-purpose computers has produced this information–attention
inversion on a global scale. Today you can access most any piece of
information, or contact most anyone you wish, via a small device in
your pocket not much bigger than a cigarette box. This capacity for
instantaneous information and connection has come to form the
background of our experience astonishingly quickly. That is to say,
our informational tools have rapidly become our informational envir-
onment. What’s more, predigital media such as television and radio
have largely been digitally retroﬁtted, rendering the networked digital
environment a constant presence in human life. Today, in the average
household in North America, you will ﬁnd thirteen internet-
connected devices.3
This inversion between information and attention has so com-
pletely pervaded our lives that it’s now (perhaps paradoxically) harder
for us to notice its effects. There seems to have been a period around
the time the ﬁeld of cybernetics, or the science of control systems,
was emerging, when it was easier to recognize the nature of this shift.
This is the period in which Simon was writing, and when the Can-
adian media theorist Marshall McLuhan and others were beginning to
put the concept of “media ecology” on the radar of popular culture.4
Now, however, we’ve pretty much lost all touch with any perceptual
benchmarks against which we might judge how utterly our informa-
tion technologies have enveloped our lives. We get fragmentary
glimpses of that old world from time to time: when we go camping,
when we take a long ﬂight without internet connectivity, when our
phone dies for several days, or when we intentionally take a digital
“detox.” But these increasingly rare occurrences are exceptions, not

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
the rule. Barring some unthinkable global catastrophe, the old world
of information scarcity seems to be gone for good.
But what does it really mean to say that information abundance
produces attention scarcity? Abundance can only be abundant relative
to some threshold, so we might ask, “What is information now abun-
dant relative to?” One answer would be “The amount of information
available historically.” While true, this doesn’t seem like the really
relevant threshold we should be interested in. For our purposes, we’re
only incidentally concerned with the historical story here: the mere
increase in information between two time points isn’t, in itself, a
problem. Rather, the relevant threshold seems to be a functional
one: what matters to us is whether the amount of information is
above or below the threshold of what can be well processed given
existing limitations.
To illustrate what I mean, consider the video game Tetris. The
goal of Tetris is to rotate, stack, and clear different conﬁgurations of
blocks as they rain down one by one from off screen, which they do at
a constantly increasing rate of speed. The total number of bricks
waiting off screen for you to stack is inﬁnite – the game can keep
going for as long as you can – but their inﬁnitude, their abundance, is
not the problem. The challenge of the game, and what ultimately does
you in, is the increasing speed at which they fall. In the same way,
information quantity as such is only important insofar as it enables
information velocity. At extreme speeds, processing fails.
So the main risk information abundance poses is not that one’s
attention will be occupied or used up by information, as though it were
some ﬁnite, quantiﬁable resource, but rather that one will lose control
over one’s attentional processes. In other words, the problems in Tetris
arise not when you stack a brick in the wrong place (though this can
contribute to problems down the line), but rather when you lose
control of the ability to direct, rotate, and stack the bricks altogether.
It’s precisely in this area – the keeping or losing of control –
where the personal and political challenges of information abundance,
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
and attention scarcity, arise. To say that information abundance pro-
duces attention scarcity means that the problems we encounter are
now less about breaking down barriers between us and information,
and more about putting barriers in place. It means that the really
important sort of censorship we ought to worry about pertains less
to the management of information, and more to the management of
attention.
Here’s the problem: Many of the systems we’ve developed to
help guide our lives – systems like news, education, law, advertising,
and so on – arose in, and still assume, an environment of information
scarcity. We’re only just beginning to explore what these systems
should do for us, and how they need to change, in this new milieu of
information abundance.
We call our time the Information Age, but I think a better name
for it would be the “Age of Attention.” In the Age of Attention, digital
technologies are uniquely poised to help us grapple with the new
challenges we face – challenges which are, fundamentally, challenges
of self-regulation.

1 Eliot, T. S. (1922). The Waste Land. New York, NY: Boni & Liveright.
2 Simon, Herbert A. (1971). Designing Organizations for an Information-
Rich World. Computers, Communication, and the Public Interest
(pp. 40–41). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
3 Fanelli, Matthew (2017). Getting Consumers’ Attention Across Every
Screen They have at Home. eMarketer, December 5. www.emarketer.com/
Article/Getting-Consumers-Attention-Across-Every-Screen-They-Have-
Home/1016798
4 McLuhan, Marshall (1964). Understanding Media. New York, NY:
Mentor. Postman, Neil (1970). The Reformed English Curriculum. High
School 1980: The Shape of the Future in American Secondary Education,
ed. A.C. Eurich. London: Pitman.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

Bring your own Boundaries
Who will be great, must be able to limit himself.
Goethe
I mostly grew up in west Texas, in a town called Abilene, which is big
enough that you might have heard it in country songs, where it
rhymes with names like Eileen or Darlene, or phrases like “treat
you mean” or “I ever seen,” but it’s still small enough that when
I was in high school Microsoft Word would autocorrect its name to
“abalone,” which refers to a species of marine snail with a shell that’s
tough and cloddish on the outside, but slippery and rainbow-like
within, as though someone had tried to ﬂush out the little being
inside with gasoline.
In my senior year of high school in Abilene I signed up for
calculus, a class that required me to have a graphing calculator –
one of those bigger models, with a dot-matrix display that lets you
visualize the implications of your equations when they get too com-
plex to imagine in your head, or to work out easily on paper. So
I acquired a Texas Instruments TI-83, the latest model, which had
come out just a couple of years earlier. An older model would have
sufﬁced, but the TI-83 had native support for something called assem-
bly programming languages, which meant you could load programs
onto it that did anything, not just graph equations. This meant that
practically, it wasn’t just a “calculator” anymore; it was a full-ﬂedged,
“general-purpose” computer. One of my classmates found a program
somewhere for the game Tetris, and soon enough I had that loaded
onto my calculator too. When class got boring, I’d sometimes load the
Tetris program and play it to pass the time. Before long, I found myself
realizing I’d opened the game and started playing it automatically,
without consciously deciding to do so. It was just so convenient,

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
having fun waiting a few key-clicks away – and it was usually far more
rewarding than listening to the teacher drone on about integrals and
differentials. That is to say, it was more immediately rewarding –
right then, in that moment.
Soon, I started falling behind in class. Distracted by calculator-
Tetris, my grades began to slide. This wasn’t anyone else’s fault, of
course; I had loaded the program onto my calculator, and I was the
one who kept opening and playing the game. But I didn’t want to tell
anyone about the problem because I was embarrassed and ashamed to
have let myself get derailed by so trivial a thing. I kept putting off my
day of reckoning with this distraction, and its effects continued to
mount. I carried my constant knowledge of the problem with me, as
well as my failure to look it in the face, which made me turn to the
quick pleasures of its immediate rewards even more. I hated how
impulsive and weak of will I had become, but I kept turning again to
the very cause of it to ﬁnd a consolation that I knew was ﬂeeting and
illusory. The bricks kept falling quicker. I kept misstacking them. The
pile kept getting higher. The music kept getting faster.
The “game over” moment ﬁnally came on a school trip in a
nearby town, where I had been scheduled to participate in a journal-
ism competition. At the last minute, word had come through from my
school that I was no longer eligible to compete because I had failed my
last calculus test. I had never failed a test in my life.
If you wanted to train all of society to be as impulsive and weak-willed
as possible, how would you do it? One way would be to invent an
impulsivity training device – let’s call it an iTrainer – that delivers an
endless supply of informational rewards on demand. You’d want to
make it small enough to ﬁt in a pocket or purse so people could carry
it anywhere they went. The informational rewards it would pipe into
their attentional world could be anything, from cute cat photos to
tidbits of news that outrage you (because outrage can, after all, be a
reward too). To boost its effectiveness, you could endow the iTrainer
with rich systems of intelligence and automation so it could adapt to

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
users’ behaviors, contexts, and individual quirks in order to get them
to spend as much time and attention with it as possible.
So let’s say you build the iTrainer and distribute it gradually
into society. At ﬁrst, people’s willpower would probably be pretty
strong and resistant. The iTrainer might also cause some awkward
social situations, at least until enough people had adopted it that it
was widely accepted, and not seen as weird. But if everyone were
to keep using it over several years, you’d probably start seeing it work
pretty well. Now, the iTrainer might make people’s lives harder to
live, of course; it would no doubt get in the way of them pursuing their
desired tasks and goals. Even though you created it, you probably
wouldn’t let your kids use one. But from the point of view of your
design goals – in other words, making the world more impulsive and
weak-willed – it would likely be a roaring success.
Then, what if you wanted to take things even further? What if
you wanted to make everyone even more distracted, angry, cynical –
and even unsure of what, or how, to think? What if you wanted to
troll everyone’s minds? You’d probably create an engine, a set of
economic incentives, that would make it proﬁtable for other people
to produce and deliver these rewards – and, where possible, you’d
make these the only incentives for doing so. You don’t want just
any rewards to get delivered – you want people to receive rewards
that speak to their impulsive selves, rewards that are the best at
punching the right buttons in their brains. For good measure, you
could also centralize the ownership of this design as much as
possible.
If you’d done all this ten years ago, right about now you’d
probably be seeing some interesting results. You’d probably see nine
out of ten people never leaving home without their iTrainer.1 Almost
half its users would say they couldn’t even live without their device.2
You’d probably see them using it to access most of the information
they consume, across every context of life, from politics to education
to celebrity gossip and beyond. You’d probably ﬁnd they were using
the iTrainer hundreds of times per day, spending a third of their
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
waking lives engaged with it, and it would probably be the ﬁrst and
last thing they engaged with every day.3
If you wanted to train society to be as weak-willed and impul-
sive as possible, you could do a whole lot worse than this. In any
event, after unleashing the iTrainer on the world, it would be absurd
to claim that it hadn’t produced signiﬁcant changes in the thoughts,
behaviors, and habits of its users. After all, everyone would have been
part of a rigorous impulsivity training program for many years! What’s
more, this program would have effectively done an end run around
many of our other societal systems; it would have opened a door
directly onto our attentional capacities, and become a lens through
which society sees the world. It would, of course, be a major under-
taking to try to understand the full story about what effects this
project had had in people’s lives – not only as individuals, but also
for society as a whole. It would certainly have had major implications
for the way we had been collectively discussing and deciding ques-
tions of great importance. And it would certainly have given us, as did
previous forms of media, political candidates that were made in
its image.
Of course, the iTrainer project would never come anywhere
close to passing a research ethics review. Launching such a project
of societal reshaping, and letting it run unchecked, would clearly be
utterly outrageous. So it’s a good thing this is all just a thought
experiment.
The new challenges we face in the Age of Attention are, on both
individual and collective levels, challenges of self-regulation. Having
some limits is inevitable in human life. In fact, limits are necessary if
we are to have any freedom at all. As the American philosopher Harry
Frankfurt puts it: “What has no boundaries has no shape.”4 Reason,
relationships, racetracks, rules of games, sunglasses, walls of build-
ings, lines on a page: our lives are full of useful constraints to which
we freely submit so that we can achieve otherwise unachievable ends.
“To be driven by our appetites alone is slavery,” wrote Rousseau in

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
The Social Contract, “while to obey a law that we have imposed on
ourselves is freedom” (p. 59). Even our old friend Diogenes, lover of
unrestrained living that he was, said, “for the conduct of life we need
right reason or a halter.”5 When we apply restraints upon ourselves
that channel our activities toward our higher goals – some call these
restraints “commitment devices” – we reach heights that would have
been otherwise unreachable. If Odysseus had not instructed his sailors
to tie him to the mast (and to plug up their own ears with wax), he
would never have heard the sirens’ song and lived to tell about it.
For most of human history, when you were born you inherited
an off-the-shelf package of religious and cultural constraints. This was
a kind of library of limits that was embedded in your social and
physical environment. These limits performed certain self-regulatory
tasks for you so you didn’t have to take them on yourself. The pack-
ages included habits, practices, rituals, social conventions, moral
codes, and a myriad of other constraints that had typically evolved
over many centuries, if not millennia, to reliably guide – or shall we
say design – our lives in the direction of particular values, and to help
us give attention to the things that matter most.
In the twentieth century the rise of secularism and modernism
in the West occasioned the collapse – if not the jettisoning – of many
of these off-the-shelf packages of constraints in the cause of the
liberation of the individual. In many cases, this rejection occurred
on the basis of philosophical or cosmological disagreements with the
old packages. This has, of course, had many great beneﬁts. Yet by
rejecting entire packages of constraint, we’ve also rejected those con-
straints that were actually useful for our purposes. “The left’s project
of liberation,” writes the American philosopher Matthew Crawford,
“led us to dismantle inherited cultural jigs that once imposed a cer-
tain coherence (for better and worse) on individual lives. This created
a vacuum of cultural authority that has been ﬁlled, opportunistically,
with attentional landscapes that get installed by whatever ‘choice
architect’ brings the most energy to the task – usually because it sees
the proﬁt potential.” The German philosopher Peter Sloterdijk, in his
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
book You Must Change Your Life, has called for a reclamation of this
particular aspect of religion – its habits and practices – which he calls
“anthropotechnics.”6
When you dismantle existing boundaries in your environment,
it frees you from their limitations, but it requires you to bring your
own boundaries where you didn’t have to before. Sometimes, taking
on this additional self-regulatory burden is totally worth it. Other
times, though, the cost is too high. According to the so-called “ego-
depletion” hypothesis, our self-control, our willpower, is a ﬁnite
resource.7 So when the self-regulatory cost of bringing your own
boundaries is high enough, it takes away willpower that could have
been spent on something else.
This increase in self-regulatory burden may pose a unique
challenge for those living in poverty, who, research suggests are more
likely to begin from a place of willpower depletion relative to every-
one else. This is largely due to the many decisions and trade-offs they
must make on a day-to-day basis that those who don’t live in poverty
don’t have to make.8 Diogenes once said that “disabled” ought to
mean “poor,” and to the extent that living in poverty means one’s
willpower can be more easily depleted, he was more right than he
knew.9 But the wider implication here is that these problems of self-
regulation in the face of information abundance aren’t just “ﬁrst-
world problems.” They carry large implications for the societal goals
of justice and equality. If the ﬁrst “digital divide” disenfranchised
those who couldn’t access information, today’s digital divide disen-
franchises those who can’t pay attention.10
It’s against this cultural backdrop, of having to bring our own
boundaries where we didn’t before, that digital technologies have
posed these new challenges of self-regulation. Like the iTrainer in
my thought experiment, digital technologies have transformed our
experiential world into a never-ending ﬂow of potential informational
rewards. They’ve become the playing ﬁeld on which everything now
competes for our attention. Similar to economic abundance, “if these
rewards arrive faster than the disciplines of prudence can form, then

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
self-control will decline with afﬂuence: the afﬂuent (with everyone
else) will become less prudent.”11 In a sense, information abundance
requires us to invert our understanding of what “information tech-
nologies” do: Rather than overcoming barriers in the world, they
increasingly exist to help us put barriers in place. The headphone
manufacturer Bose now sells a product called Hearphones that allows
the user to block out all sounds in their environment except the ones
coming from their desired source – to focus on a conversation in a
loud room, for example. The product’s website reads: “Focus on the
voices you want to hear – and ﬁlter out the noises you don’t – so you
can comfortably hear every word. From now on, how you hear is up to
you.”12 We could also read this tagline as a ﬁtting description of the
new challenges in the Age of Attention as a whole.
The increasing rate of technological change further ampliﬁes
these challenges of attention and self-regulation. Historically, new
forms of media took years, if not generations, to be adopted, analyzed,
and adapted to. Today, however, new technologies can arrive on the
scene and rapidly scale to millions of users in the course of months or
even days. The constant stream of new products this unleashes –
along with the ongoing optimization of features within products
already in use – can result in a situation in which users are in a
constant state of learning and adaptation to new interaction dynam-
ics, familiar enough with their technologies to operate them, but
never so fully in control that they can prevent the technologies from
operating on them in unexpected or undesirable ways. This keeps us
living on what I sometimes call a “treadmill of incompetence.”
In his essay “Reﬂections on Progress”, Aldous Huxley writes,
“however powerful and well trained the surface will is, it is not a
match for circumstances.”13 Indeed, one of the major lessons of the
past several decades of psychology research has been the power of
people’s environments in shaping their thoughts and behaviors. On
one level, these effects may be temporary, such as changes in one’s
mood. As Nikola Tesla observed, “One may feel a sudden wave of
sadness and rake his brain for an explanation when he might have
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
noticed that it was caused by a cloud cutting off the rays of the sun.”14
Yet our environments can also have deep, long-lasting inﬂuences on
our underlying capacities – even how autonomous (or nonautono-
mous) we are able to be. The Oxford philosopher Neil Levy writes in
his book Neuroethics, “Autonomy is developmentally dependent
upon the environment: we become autonomous individuals, able to
control our behavior in the light of our values, only if the environment
in which we grow up is suitably structured to reward self-control.”15
Yet in the absence of environments that reward self-control or
provide effective commitment devices, we’re left to our own devices –
and given our inherent scarcity of attention, the resulting cognitive
overload often makes bringing our own boundaries extremely chal-
lenging, if not prohibitive. Limiting our lives in the right way was
already hard enough, but in the Age of Attention we encounter even
stronger headwinds. Of course, digital technology is uniquely poised
to help us deal with these new challenges. And if technology exists to
solve problems in our lives, it ought to help us surmount these
challenges.
Unfortunately, far from helping us mitigate these challenges of
self-regulation, our technologies have largely been amplifying them.
Rather than helping us to more effectively stack and clear the Tetris
bricks in our lives, they’ve been making the blocks fall faster than we
ever imagined they could.

1 Deutsche Telekom AG (2012). Smart Payments – How the Cell Phone
Becomes a Wallet. www.studie-life.de/en/life-reports/smart-payments/
2 Smith, Aaron (2015). U.S. Smartphone Use in 2015. Pew Research Center.
www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/us-smartphone-use-in-2015/
3 Perlow, Leslie A. (2012). Sleeping with Your Smartphone: How to Break
the 24/7 Habit and Change the Way you Work. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business Review Press. Andrews, S., Ellis, D. A., Shaw, H. and Piwek, L.
(2015). Beyond Self-Report: Tools to Compare Estimated and Real-World
Smart-phone Use. PLoS One, 10 (10), 1–9. dscout (2016). Mobile

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Touches: dscout’s Inaugural Study on Humans and their Tech. https://
blog.dscout.com/hubfs/downloads/dscout_mobile_touches_study_
2016.pdf
4 Frankfurt, Harry G. (1988). The Importance of What We Care About:
Philosophical Essays. Cambridge University Press.
5 Diogenes Laertius vi. 24; Arrian VII.2.
6 Sloterdijk, P. (2014). You Must Change Your Life. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley.
7 Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M. and Tice, D. M. (1998). Ego
Depletion: Is the Active Self a Limited Resource? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 74 (5), 1252–1265. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
3514.74.5.1252
8 Banerjee, Abhijit and Mullainathan, Sendhil (2010). The Shape of
Temptation: Implications for the Economic Lives of the Poor. National
Bureau of Economic Research working paper. www.nber.org/papers/
w15973. Spears, Dean (2010). Economic Decision-making in Poverty
Depletes Behavioral Control. Centre for Economic Policy Studies, working
paper. www.princeton.edu/ceps/workingpapers/213spears.pdf. Vohs, K.
D., Baumeister, R. F., Schmeichel, B. J., Twenge, J. M., Nelson, N. M., Tice,
D. M. and Cirino, K. (2008). Making Choices Impairs Subsequent
Self-Control: A Limited-Resource Account of Decision Making,
Self-Regulation, and Active Initiative. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 94 (5), 883–898. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.94.5.883
9 Diogenes Laertius vi. 33; Arrian VII.2.
10 Norris, Pippa (2001). Digital Divide: Civic Engagement, Information
Poverty, and the Internet Worldwide. Cambridge University Press.
11 Offer, Avner (2006). The Challenge of Afﬂuence: Self-Control and
Well-being in the United States and Britain Since 1950. Oxford
University Press.
12 Bose (2017). Bose HearPhones. www.bose.com/en_us/products/
headphones/conversation_enhancing_headphones/hearphones.html
13 Huxley, Aldous and Smith, Huston (2013). The Divine Within: Selected
Writings on Enlightenment. New York, NY: Harper Perennial.
14 Tesla, Nikola (1919). My Inventions, p. 56.
15 Levy, Neil (2007). Neuroethics. Cambridge University Press, p. xxx.
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

Empires of the Mind
The empires of the future are the empires of the mind.
Churchill
There was once a man walking down a road, wearing a cloak to keep
warm. The North Wind noticed him and said to the Sun, “Let’s see
which one of us can get that man to take off his cloak. I bet I’ll surely
win, for no one can resist the gales of my mighty breath!” The Sun
agreed to the contest, so the North Wind went ﬁrst and started
blowing at the man as hard as he could. The man’s hat ﬂew off; leaves
swirled in the air all around him. He could barely take a step forward,
but he clutched his cloak tightly – and no matter how hard the North
Wind blew, the man’s cloak stayed on. “What? Impossible!” the
North Wind said. “Well, if I have failed,” he said to the Sun, “then
surely there is no hope for you.” “We shall see,” said the Sun. The Sun
welled up his chest and made himself as bright as he could possibly be.
The man, still walking, had to shield his eyes because the Sun’s shine
was so intense. Soon the man grew so warm inside his wool cloak that
he began to feel faint: he started to stagger, sweat dripping off his head
into the dirt. Breathing deeply, he untied his cloak and ﬂung it over
his shoulder, all the while scanning his environs for a source of water
where he could cool off. The Sun’s persuasion had won out where the
North Wind’s coercion could not.
This story comes from Aesop, the Greek fabulist who lived a
few hundred years before Diogenes ever trolled the streets of Corinth.
Like Diogenes, Aesop was also a slave at one point in his life before
eventually being freed. Aesop died in Delphi, where the famous oracle
lived upon whose temple was inscribed that famous maxim “Know
Thyself.” You probably know some of Aesop’s other fables – “The
Tortoise and the Hare,” “The Ant and the Grasshopper,” “The Dog

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
and its Reﬂection” – but “The North Wind and the Sun” is one of my
favorites, because it shows us that persuasion can be just as powerful,
if not more so, than coercion.1
Of all the ways humans try to inﬂuence each other, persuasion
might be the most prevalent and consequential. A marriage proposal.
A car dealer’s sales pitch. The temptation of Christ. A political stump
speech. This book. When we consider the stories of our lives, and the
stories that give our lives meaning, we ﬁnd that they often turn on
pivot points of persuasion. Since ancient Greece, persuasion has been
understood primarily in its linguistic form, as rhetorike techne, or the
art of the orator. Aristotle identiﬁed what he saw as three pillars of
rhetoric – ethos, pathos, and logos – which roughly correspond to our
notions of authority, emotion, and reason. And into medieval times,
persuasion held a central position in education, alongside grammar
and logic, as one-third of the classical trivium.
Yet all design is “persuasive” in a broad sense; it all directs our
thoughts or actions in one way or another.2 There’s no such thing as a
“neutral” technology. All design embodies certain goals and values;
all design shapes the world in some way. A technology can no more be
neutral than a government can be neutral. In fact, the cyber- in
“cybernetics” and the gover- in “government” both stem from the
same Greek root: kyber-, “to steer or to guide,” originally used in the
context of the navigation of ships. (This nautical metaphor provides a
ﬁtting illustration of what I mean: The idea of a “neutral” rudder is an
incoherent one. Certainly, a rudder held straight can help you stay the
course – but it won’t guide your ship somewhere. Nor, in the same
way, does any technology.)
However, some design is “persuasive” in a narrower sense than
this. Some design has a form that follows directly from a speciﬁc
representation of users’ thoughts or behaviors, that the designer wants
to change. This sort of persuasive design is by no means unique to
digital technologies; humans have long designed physical environ-
ments toward such persuasive ends. Consider, for instance, the place-
ment of escalators in shopping malls, the music in grocery stores, or
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
the layouts of cities.3 Yet what Churchill said about physical archi-
tecture – “we shape our buildings, and afterwards, our buildings shape
us” – is just as true of the information architectures in which we now
spend so much of our lives.4
For most of human history, persuasive design in this narrower
sense has been a more or less handicraft undertaking. It’s had the
character of an art rather than a science. As a result, we haven’t
worried too much about its power over us. Instead, we’ve kept an
eye on coercive, as opposed to persuasive, designs. As Postman
pointed out, we’ve been more attuned to the Orwellian than the
Huxleyan threats to our freedom.
But now the winds have changed. While we weren’t watching,
persuasion became industrialized. In the twentieth century the
modern advertising industry came to maturity and began systematic-
ally applying new knowledge about human psychology and decision
making. In parallel, advertising’s scope expanded beyond the mere
provision of information to include the shaping of behaviors and
attitudes. By the end of the twentieth century, new forms of electric
media afforded advertisers new platforms and strategies for their per-
suasion, but the true effectiveness of their efforts was still hard to
measure. Then, the internet came along and closed the feedback loop
of measurement. Very quickly, an unprecedented infrastructure of
analytics, experimentation, message delivery, customization, and
automation emerged to enable digital advertising practices. Further-
more, networked general-purpose computers were becoming more
portable and connected, and people were spending more time than
ever with them. Designers began applying techniques and infrastruc-
tures developed for digital advertising to advance persuasive goals in
the platforms and services themselves. The scalability and increasing
proﬁtability of digital advertising made it the default business model,
and thus incentive structure, for digital platforms and services. As a
result, goals and metrics that served the ends of advertising became
the dominant goals and metrics in the design of digital services them-
selves. By and large, these metrics involved capturing the maximum

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
amount of users’ time and attention possible. In order to win the ﬁerce
global competition for our attention, design was forced to speak to the
lowest parts of us, and to exploit our cognitive vulnerabilities.
This is how the twenty-ﬁrst century began: with sophisticated
persuasion allying with sophisticated technology to advance the pet-
tiest possible goals in our lives. It began with the AI behind the system
that beat the world champion at the board game Go recommending
videos to keep me watching YouTube longer.5
There’s no good analogue for this monopoly of the mind the
forces of industrialized persuasion now hold – especially on the scale
of billions of minds. Perhaps Christian adherents carrying the Bible
everywhere they go, or the memorization of full Homeric epics in
the Greek oral tradition, or the assignment of Buddhist mantras to
recite all day under one’s breath, or the total propaganda machines of
totalitarian states. But we must look to the religious, the mythic, the
totalistic, to ﬁnd any remotely appropriate comparison. We have not
been primed, either by nature or habit, to notice, much less struggle
against, these new persuasive forces that so deeply shape our atten-
tion, our actions, and our lives.
This problem is not new just in scale, but also in kind. The
empires of the present are the empires of the mind.
On October 26, 1994, if you had ﬁred up your 28.8k modem, double-
clicked the icon for the newly released Netscape Navigator web
browser, and accessed the website of Wired Magazine, you would
have seen a rectangle at the top of the page. In it, tie-dye text against
a black background would have asked you, “Have you ever clicked
your mouse right HERE? You will.”6 Whether intended as prediction
or command, this message – the ﬁrst banner ad on the web – was more
correct than its creators could have imagined. Digital ad spend was
projected to pass $223 billion in 2017, and to continue to grow at
double-digit rates until at least 2020.7 Digital advertising is by far the
dominant business model for monetizing information on the internet
today. Many of the most widely used platforms, such as Google,
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Facebook, and Twitter, are at core advertising companies. As a result,
many of the world’s top software engineers, designers, analysts, and
statisticians now spend their days ﬁguring out how to direct people’s
thinking and behavior toward predeﬁned goals that may not align
with their own. As Jeff Hammerbacher, Facebook’s ﬁrst research
scientist, remarked: “The best minds of my generation are thinking
about how to make people click ads . . . and it sucks.”8
As a media dynamic, advertising has historically been an excep-
tion to the rule of information delivery in a given medium. It’s the
newspaper ads, but not the articles; it’s the billboards, but not the
street signs; it’s the TV commercials, but not the programs. In a world
of information scarcity, it was useful to make these exceptions to the
rule because they gave us novel information that could help us make
better purchasing decisions. This has, broadly speaking, been the
justiﬁcation
for
advertising’s
existence
in
an
information-
scarce world.
In the mid twentieth century, as the modern advertising indus-
try was coming to maturity, it started systematically applying new
knowledge about human psychology and decision making. Psycholo-
gists such as Sigmund Freud had laid the groundwork for the study of
unconscious thought, and in the 1970s Daniel Kahneman and Amos
Tversky revealed the ways in which our automatic modes of thinking
can override more rational rules of statistical prediction.9 In fact a
great deal of our everyday experience consists of such automatic,
nonconscious processes; our lives take place, as the researchers John
Bargh and Tanya Chartrand have said, against the backdrop of an
“unbearable automaticity of being.”10 On the basis of all this new
knowledge about human psychology and decision making, advertis-
ing’s scope continued to expand beyond the informational to the
persuasive; beyond shaping behaviors to shaping attitudes.11 And
new forms of electric media were giving them new avenues for their
persuasion.
Yet most advertising remained faith-based. Without a compre-
hensive, reliable measurement infrastructure, it was impossible to

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
study the effectiveness of one’s advertising efforts, or to know how to
improve on them. As John Wanamaker, a department store owner
around the beginning of the twentieth century, is reported to have
said, “Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted; the trouble is
I don’t know which half.”12 The potential for computing to revolu-
tionize advertising measurement was recognized as early as the 1960s,
when advertising agencies began experimenting with large mainframe
computers. Companies such as Nielsen were also beginning to use
diary and survey panel methods to understand audiences and their
consumption behaviors, which marginally improved advertising intel-
ligence by providing access to demographic data. However, these
methods were laborious and expensive, and their aggregate data was
useful only directionally. Measuring the actual effectiveness of ads
was still largely infeasible.
The internet changed all that. Digital technology enabled a
Cambrian explosion of advertising measurement. It was now possible
to measure – at the level of individual users – people’s behaviors (e.g.
page views), intentions (e.g. search queries), contexts (e.g. physical
locations), interests (e.g. inferences from users’ browsing behavior),
unique identiﬁers (e.g. device IDs or emails of logged-in users), and
more. Also, vastly improved “benchmarking” data – information
about the advertising efforts of one’s competitors – became available
via market intelligence services like comScore and Hitwise. Web
browsers were key in enabling this sea change of advertising measure-
ment, not only because of their new technical affordances, but also
because of the precedent they set for subsequent measurement cap-
abilities in other contexts.
In particular, the browser “cookie” – a small ﬁle delivered
imperceptibly via website code to track user behavior across pages –
played an essential role. In his book The Daily You, Joseph Turow
writes that the cookie did “more to shape advertising – and social
attention – on the web than any other invention apart from the
browser itself.”13 Cookies are also emblematic, in their scope-creep,
of digital advertising measurement as a whole. Initially, cookies were
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
created to enable “shopping cart” functionality on retail websites;
they were a way for the site to keep track of a user as he or she moved
from page to page. Soon, however, they were being used to track
people between sites, and indeed all across the web. Many groups
raised privacy concerns about these scope-creeping cookies, and it
soon became commonplace to speak of two main types: “ﬁrst-party”
cookies (cookies created by the site itself ) and “third-party” cookies
(cookies created by someone else). In 1997 the Internet Engineering
Task Force proposed taking away third-party cookies, which sent the
online advertising industry into a frenzy.14 Ultimately, though, third-
party cookies became commonplace. As unique identiﬁers at the level
of the web-browser session, cookies paved the way for unique identi-
ﬁers at higher levels, such as the device and even the user. Since 2014,
for instance, Google’s advertising platform has been able to track
whether you visit a company’s store in person after you see their ad.15
To manage this ﬁre hose of measurement, “analytics” systems –
such as Omniture, Coremetrics, and Google Analytics – emerged to
serve as uniﬁed interfaces for managing one’s advertising as well
as nonadvertising data. In doing so, they helped establish the
“engagement” metrics of advertising (e.g. number of clicks, impres-
sions, or time on site) as default operational metrics for websites
themselves. This effectively extended the design logic of advertising –
and particularly attention-oriented advertising (as opposed to adver-
tising that serves users’ intentions) – to the design of the entire user
experience.
In previous media, advertising had largely been an exception to
the rule of information delivery – but in digital media, it seemed to
have broken down some essential boundary; it seemed now to have
become the rule. If advertising was previously said to be “underwrit-
ing” the dominant design goals of a medium, in digital media it now
seemed to be “overwriting” them with its own. It wasn’t just that the
line between advertising and nonadvertising was getting blurry, as
with “native advertisements” (i.e. ads that have a similar look and
feel to the rest of the content) or product placements (e.g. companies

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
paying YouTube or Instagram “inﬂuencers” to use a product). Rather,
it seemed that everything was now becoming an ad.
The conﬂuence of these trends has given us the digital “attention
economy”, the environment in which digital products and services
relentlessly compete to capture and exploit our attention. In the
attention economy, winning means getting as many people as pos-
sible to spend as much time and attention as possible with one’s
product or service. Although, as it’s often said, in the attention econ-
omy “the user is the product.”
Think about it: The attention you’re deploying in order to read
this book right now (an attention for which, by the way, I’m grateful) –
an attention that includes, among other things, the saccades of your
eyeballs, the information ﬂows of your executive control function,
your daily stockpile of willpower, and the goals you hope reading this
book will help you achieve – these and other processes you use to
navigate your life are literally the object of competition among many
of the technologies you use every day. There are literally billions of
dollars being spent to ﬁgure out how to get you to look at one thing
over another; to buy one thing over another; to care about one thing
over another. This is literally the design purpose of many of the
technologies you trust to guide your life every day.
Because there’s so much competition for our attention, designers
inevitably have to appeal to the lowest parts of us – they have to privilege
our impulses over our intentions even further – and exploit the catalog of
decision-making biases that psychologists and behavioral economists
have been diligently compiling over the last few decades. These biases
include things like loss aversion (such as the “fear of missing out,” often
abbreviated as FOMO), social comparison, the status quo bias, framing
effects, anchoring effects, and countless others.16 My friend Tristan
Harris has a nice phrase for this cheap exploitation of our vulnerabilities:
the “race to the bottom of the brain stem.”17
Clickbait is emblematic of this petty competition for our atten-
tion. Although the word is of recent coinage, “clickbait” has already
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
been enshrined in the Oxford English Dictionary, where it’s deﬁned
as “content whose main purpose is to attract attention and encourage
visitors to click on a link to a particular web page.” You’ve no doubt
come across clickbait on the web, even if you haven’t known it by
name. It’s marked by certain recognizable and rage-inducing headline
patterns, as seen in, for example: “23 Things Parents Should Never
Apologize For,” “This One Surprising Phrase Will Make You Seem
More Polite,” or “This Baby Panda Showed Up At My Door. You
Won’t Believe What Happened Next.” Clickbait laser-targets our
emotions: a study of 100 million articles shared on Facebook found
that the most common phrases in “top-performing” headlines were
phrases such as “are freaking out,” “make you cry,” and “shocked to
see.” It also found that headlines which “appeal to a sense of tribal
belonging” drive increased engagement, for instance those of the
formulation “X things only [some group] will understand.”18
In the attention economy, this is the game all persuasive design
must play – not only the writers of headlines. In fact, there’s a bur-
geoning industry of authors and consultants helping designers of all
sorts draw on the latest research in behavioral science to punch the
right buttons in our brains as effectively and reliably as possible.19
One major aim of such persuasive design is to keep users
coming back to a product repeatedly, which requires the creation of
habits. The closest thing to a bible for designers who want to induce
habits in their users is probably Nir Eyal’s book Hooked: How to
Build Habit Forming Products. “Technologists build products meant
to persuade people to do what we want them to do,” Eyal writes.
“We call these people ‘users’ and even if we don’t say it aloud, we
secretly wish every one of them would become ﬁendishly hooked
to whatever we’re making.”20 In the book, Eyal gives designers a
four-stage model for hooking users that consists of a trigger, an action,
a variable reward, and the user’s “investment” in the product (e.g. of
time or money).
The key element here is the variable reward. When you ran-
domize the reward schedule for a given action, it increases the

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
number of times a person is likely to take that action.21 This is the
underlying dynamic at work behind the high engagement users have
with “inﬁnite” scrolling feeds, especially those with “pull-to-refresh”
functionality, which we ﬁnd in countless applications and websites
today such as Facebook’s News Feed or Twitter’s Stream. It’s also
used widely in all sorts of video games. In fact, this effect is often
referred to as the “slot machine” effect, because it’s the foundational
mechanism on which the machine gambling industry relies – and
which generates for them over a billion dollars in revenue every day
in the United States alone.22 Variable reward scheduling is also the
engine of the compulsive, and sometimes addictive, habits of usage
that many users struggle to control.23
Whether we’re using a slot machine or an app that’s designed to
“hook” us, we’re doing the same thing; we’re “paying for the possibil-
ity of a surprise.”24 With slot machines, we pay with our money. With
technologies in the attention economy, we pay with our attention.
And, as with slot machines, the beneﬁts we receive from these tech-
nologies – namely “free” products and services – are up front and
immediate, whereas we pay the attentional costs in small denomin-
ations distributed over time. Rarely do we realize how costly our free
things are.
Persuasive design isn’t inherently bad, of course, even when it
does appeal to our psychological biases. Indeed, it can be used for our
beneﬁt. In the area of public policy, for instance, the practice of
“nudging” aims to structure people’s environments in ways that help
them make decisions that better promote their well-being. However,
in the attention economy the incentives for persuasive design reward
grabbing, and holding, our attention – keeping us looking, clicking,
tapping, and scrolling. This ampliﬁes, rather than mitigates, the chal-
lenges of self-regulation we already face in the era of information
abundance.
On the opening screen of one of the ﬁrst web browsers there was a
notice that read, “There is no ‘top’ to the World Wide Web.”25 In other
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
words, the web isn’t categorized hierarchically, like a directory of
ﬁles – it’s decentralized, a network of nodes. One of the tragic ironies
about the internet is that such a decentralized infrastructure of infor-
mation management could enable the most centralized systems of
attention management in human history. Today, just a few people at a
handful of companies now have the ability to shape what billions
of human beings think and do. One person, Mark Zuckerberg, owns
Facebook, which has over 2 billion users, as well as WhatsApp
(1.3 billion users), Facebook Messenger (1.2 billion users), and
Instagram (800 million users).26 Google and Facebook now comprise
85
percent
(and rising)
of
internet
advertising’s
year-over-year
growth.27 And the Facebook News Feed is now the primary source
of trafﬁc for news websites.28
Alexander the Great could never have dreamed of having this
amount of power. We don’t even have a good word for it yet. This isn’t
a currently categorizable form of control over one’s fellow human
beings. It’s more akin to a new government or religion, or even
language. But even these categories feel insufﬁcient. There aren’t even
2 billion English speakers in the world.
In 1943, in the thick of World War II, Winston Churchill
traveled to Harvard to pick up an honorary degree and say a few words
to a packed house. The title of his talk was “The Gift of a Common
Tongue.” After lauding the fact that Britain and America shared a
common language – which, he hoped, might one day serve as the basis
not only for Anglo-American fraternity and solidarity, but even for a
common citizenship – he gave a plug to Basic English, a simpliﬁed
version of English that he hoped might one day become a global lingua
franca, a “medium, albeit primitive, of intercourse and understand-
ing.” This was the context – the prospect of giving the world a
common linguistic operating system – in which he said “the empires
of the future are the empires of the mind.”
The corollary of Churchill’s maxim is that the freedoms of
the future are the freedoms of the mind. His future was the present
we now struggle to see. Yet when the light falls on it just right, we

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
can see the clear and urgent threat that this unprecedented system
of intelligent, industrialized persuasion poses to our freedom of
attention.

1 Aesop, “The North Wind and the Sun.” Perry Index 46.
2 Redström, Johan (2006). Persuasive Design: Fringes and Foundations.
Persuasive Technology, 112–122.
3 Goss, Jon (1993). The “Magic of the Mall”: An Analysis of Form, Function,
and Meaning in the Contemporary Retail Built Environment. Annals of
the Association of American Geographers, 83 (1), 18–47. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1467-8306.1993.tb01921.x
4 Churchill, Winston (1943). House of Commons Rebuilding (pp. 403–406).
www.winstonchurchill.org/resources/speeches/1941-1945-war-leader/
the-price-of-greatness-is-responsibility/
5 Simonite, Tom (2016). How Google Plans to Solve Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
MIT Technology Review. www.technologyreview.com/s/601139/how-
google-plans-to-solve-artiﬁcial-intelligence/. Rowan, David (2015).
DeepMind: Inside Google’s Super-brain. WIRED. www.wired.co.uk/
article/deepmind
6 Singel, Ryan (2010). OCT. 27, 1994: Web Gives Birth to Banner Ads.
WIRED. www.wired.com/2010/10/1027hotwired-banner-ads
7 eMarketer Report (2017). Worldwide Ad Spending: The eMarketer Forecast
for 2017. www.emarketer.com/Report/Worldwide-Ad-Spending-
eMarketer-Forecast-2017/2002019
8 Vance, Ashlee (2011). This Tech Bubble is Different. Bloomberg
Businessweek, April 14.
9 Samuels, J., Eaton, W. W., Bienvenu, O. J., Brown, C. H., Costa, P. T. and
Nestadt, G. (2002). Prevalence and Correlates of Personality Disorders in a
Community Sample. British Journal of Psychiatry: The Journal of Mental
Science, 180 (6), 536–542. https://doi.org/10.1192/BJP.180.6.536. Tversky,
Amos and Kahneman, Daniel (1973). Availability: A Heuristic for Judging
Frequency and Probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5 (2), 207–232. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(73)90033-9
10 Bargh, John A. and Chartrand, Tanya L. (1999). The Unbearable
Automaticity of Being. American Psychologist, 54 (7), 462.
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
11 Crisp, Roger (1987). Persuasive Advertising, Autonomy, and the Creation
of Desire. Journal of Business Ethics, 6 (5), 413–418.
12 Bradt, George (2016). Wanamaker was Wrong – The Vast Majority of
Advertising is Wasted. Forbes, September 14.
13 Turow, Joseph (2012). The Daily You: How the New Advertising Industry
is Deﬁning your Identity and your Worth. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
14 Barth, A. (2011). HTTP State Management Mechanism. Internet
Engineering Task Force. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6265
15 Lawson, Matt (2015). Under the Hood: How Google AdWords Measures
Store Visits. Search Engine Land, June 18. https://searchengineland.com/
hood-google-adwords-measures-store-visits-222905
16 Kahneman, Daniel (2012). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Przybylski, A. K., Murayama, K.,
DeHaan, C. R. and Gladwell, V. (2013). Motivational, Emotional, and
Behavioral Correlates of Fear of Missing Out. Computers in
Human Behavior, 29 (4), 1841–1848.
17 Harris, Tristan (2016). How Technology Hijacks People’s Minds – From a
Magician and Google’s Design Ethicist. Thrive Global, May 18. https://
journal.thriveglobal.com/how-technology-hijacks-peoples-minds-from-a-
magician-and-google-s-design-ethicist-56d62ef5edf3
18 Rayson, Steve (2017). We Analyzed 100 Million Headlines. Here’s What
We Learned. Buzzsumo, June 26. http://buzzsumo.com/blog/most-shared-
headlines-study/
19 Fogg, B. J. (2003). Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change
What We Think and Do. Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann. Parr, Martin
(2015). The Selﬁe Stick. www.martinparr.com/2015/the-selﬁe-stick/
20 Eyal, Nir (2014). Hooked: How to build Habit-Forming Products. London:
Portfolio Penguin.
21 Ferster, C. B. and Skinner, B. F. (1957). Schedules of Reinforcement. East
Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
22 Rivlin, Gary (2007). Slot Machines for the Young and Active. New York
Times, December 10.
23 Schüll, Natasha (2014). Addiction by Design: Machine Gambling in Las
Vegas. Princeton University Press.
24 Kincaid, Harold and Ross, Don (eds.) (2009). The Oxford Handbook of
Philosophy of Economics. Oxford University Press.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
25 Electronic Frontier Foundation (1994). https://w2.eff.org/Net_culture/
Net_info/EFF_Net_Guide/EEGTTI_HTML/eeg_213.html
26 Statista (2017). www.statista.com/markets/424/topic/540/social-media-
user-generated-content/
27 FastCompany (2017). Google and Facebook Now Own 85% of Internet
Ad Growth. www.fastcompany.com/4039263/google-and-facebook-now-
own-85-of-internet-ad-growth
28 Lee, Timothy B. (2016). Mark Zuckerberg is in Denial About How
Facebook is Harming our Politics. Vox, November 10. www.vox.com/new-
money/2016/11/6/13509854/facebook-politics-news-bad
   

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

Clicks against Humanity
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

The Citizen is the Product
I keep a list of things that have no name but need one. Like the feeling
you get when you stare at a word so long that it looks like it’s spelled
wrong. Or that social glitch that happens when you’re about to pass
someone on the sidewalk, but neither of you can tell which side the
other wants to walk on, so when the moment comes you both do that
jerky little stutter-step thing that somehow, miraculously, always
manages to resolve itself. Or when you’re sitting in a chair and some-
one walks behind you, and you scoot forward to give them room to
pass even when you don’t need to, just to acknowledge their existence
and the fact that they’re passing. Or when you’re in a taxi and your
driver maneuvers in some way that cuts off another driver or pedes-
trian, and your impulse is to apologize to them because it’s your taxi
and you beneﬁtted from his transgression, but on the other hand it
wasn’t your fault, so as you pass the aggrieved party you make some
token gesture out the window, like a little pinched-lip half-smile, as
though to half-assedly signal “Sorry!”
“The limits of my language,” wrote the philosopher Ludwig
Wittgenstein, “mean the limits of my world.”1 We expand our aware-
ness, both of ourselves and of our world, when we expand our lan-
guage. We see things we didn’t know to see before, and we learn how
to talk about them with others.2 What did we call “clickbait” before
that word came into being? Or “binge-watching,” or “humblebrag,” or
“FOMO”?
Diogenes also needed to coin new terms to describe the way he
wanted to relate to the world. When people asked him where he was
from, he replied that he was “a citizen of the world” – a kosmopolitês,
or “cosmopolitan.”3 No one had ever said this before, so no one knew
what it meant. The term certainly didn’t have the connotation it has

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
today: Diogenes was no moneyed jet-setter. In fact, at one point in his
life Diogenes was put on sale as a slave. It’s said that when the slave-
master brought him before a group of potential buyers, he directed
Diogenes to tell them what he could do. Diogenes retorted, “Govern
men.” One potential buyer was so impressed by this reply that he
immediately purchased Diogenes and put him in charge of educating
his children. The “citizen of the world,” it seemed, had become the
product.
We need new words to describe how we want to relate to our
new empires of the mind. A vast project of industrialized persuasion
has emerged under our feet. It competes to capture and exploit our
attention, and we want to account for the ways this threatens the
success of our personal and political lives. What we need, then, is a
richer and more capacious way of talking about attention. As Tony
Judt writes in Ill Fares the Land, “you must be able to name a problem
if you wish to solve it.”4
However, in our societal and political discussions we lack such
a language. As a result, we’ve failed to account for the wider set of
technological “distractions” that threaten us most. We still grapple
with attention using conceptual tools developed in environments of
information scarcity. We don’t have a way of thinking about attention
as a thing. The limits of our language are the limits of our
attentional world.
What is attention? “Everyone knows what attention is,” wrote
William James in his 1899 text The Principles of Psychology. In
reality, no one really knows what attention is. (And I’m not just
taking the contrary position because my name happens to be the
inverse of his.) The term “attention” is used in many different ways
across a wide range of domains.5 In fact, even within the narrowly
specialized psychology and neuroscience literatures, researchers can’t
seem to agree.6
Generally speaking, though, when we use the term “atten-
tion” in day-to-day parlance, we typically mean what cognitive

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
scientists call the “spotlight” of attention, or the direction of
our moment-to-moment awareness within the immediate task
domain.7 The “spotlight” of attention is the sort of attention that
helps us do what we want to do. It includes the way I’m selecting
certain pieces of information from my sensory stream as I write
this: I’m looking at a certain section of my computer screen; I’m
typing a particular key on my keyboard. (In fact, just as I was
writing the previous sentence, a helicopter went whopwhopwhop
past my window and disappeared behind a tree, momentarily dis-
tracting the spotlight of my attention.)
Yet this is exactly the surface-level sort of “distraction” at
which our day-to-day language about attention already operates.
Expanding our language means diving down to deeper levels of atten-
tion. How can we access those deeper levels with a view to clarifying
the distinct challenges of the attention economy?
Perhaps pivoting our question may help. Rather than asking
“What is attention?”, I wonder whether a better question would be,
“What do we pay when we ‘pay’ attention?” In this light, new spaces
of possibility open up that allow us to venture well beyond the
domain of the “spotlight” of attention.
What do you pay when you pay attention? You pay with all the
things you could have attended to, but didn’t: all the goals you didn’t
pursue, all the actions you didn’t take, and all the possible yous you
could have been, had you attended to those other things. Attention is
paid in possible futures forgone. You pay for that extra Game of
Thrones episode with the heart-to-heart talk you could have had with
your anxious child. You pay for that extra hour on social media with
the sleep you didn’t get and the fresh feeling you didn’t have the next
morning. You pay for giving in to that outrage-inducing piece of
clickbait about that politician you hate with the patience and
empathy it took from you, and the anger you have at yourself for
allowing yourself to take the bait in the ﬁrst place.
We pay attention with the lives we might have lived. When we
consider the opportunity costs in this wider view, the question of
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
attention extends far beyond the next turn in your life’s GPS: it
encompasses all the turns and their relations, the nature of your
destination, the speciﬁc way you want to get there, why you’re going
there, and also your ability to ask any of these questions in the ﬁrst
place. In this view, the question of attention becomes the question of
having the freedom to navigate your life in the way you want, across
all scales of the human experience.
The great thinkers on the question of freedom can be of use
here, in particular the nineteenth-century British philosopher John
Stuart Mill. In his seminal text On Liberty, Mill writes that the
“appropriate region of human liberty . . . comprises, ﬁrst, the inward
domain of consciousness . . . liberty of thought and feeling; absolute
freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects, practical or specu-
lative.” “This principle,” he writes, “requires liberty of tastes and
pursuits; of framing the plan of our life to suit our own character.”8
Here, Mill seems to me to be articulating something like a freedom of
attention. Crucially, he points out that freedom of the mind is the ﬁrst
freedom, upon which freedom of expression depends. The freedom of
speech is meaningless without the freedom of attention, which is both
its complement and its prerequisite.
But Mill also gives us a clue here about how we might think
more broadly about attention – how we might take into account the
full range of potential harms to which our “almost inﬁnite appetite for
distractions” might fall prey. So attention isn’t just about what you’re
doing right now. It’s about the way you navigate your whole life: it’s
about who you are, who you want to be, and the way you deﬁne and
pursue those things.
This suggests that we need to move beyond a narrowly psych-
ologized notion of attention. Georg Franck writes, “Attention is far
more than just the ready supply of information processing capacity.
Attention is the essence of being conscious in the sense of both
self-certain existence and alert presence of mind. Attention is the
medium in which everything must be represented that is to become
real for us as experiencing creatures.”9 This is an intriguing

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
direction in which to take the concept of attention. However, for
our present purposes it seems overly broad.
Perhaps William James’s description of “effort of attention” as
“the essential phenomenon of will” points the way to a narrower and
more useful middle ground. If we expand our notion of “attention” in
the direction of conceptions of the human will, this may allow us to
take a view that’s wide enough to include more than just the immedi-
ate “spotlight,” but not so ultra-wide that it encompasses totalizing
concepts such as “consciousness,” “being,” “life itself,” and so on.
I’m not arguing here that we should think of attention as coextensive
with the human will, but rather as a construct that we can usefully
expand in that general direction. For our present purposes, we might
think of this widened view of “attention” as the full stack of naviga-
tional capacities across all levels of human life.
The will is, of course, also the source of the authority of democracy. In
this light, the political and moral implications of the digital attention
economy start to move into the foreground. Article 21 of the Univer-
sal Declaration of Human Rights states, “The will of the people shall
be the basis of the authority of government.” If the digital attention
economy were compromising the human will, it would therefore be
striking at the very foundations of democracy. This would directly
threaten not only individual freedom and autonomy, but also our
collective ability to pursue any politics worth having.
Of course, the “luminous conception” of the general will
Rousseau writes about is not merely the aggregation of individual
wills: it’s the joined will of individuals where they are all “concerned
with the common interest.” That is to say, an individual can have
a personal will that is contrary or dissimilar to the general will that he
has as a citizen. So the political implications of undermining atten-
tion, in this broader sense, are not fully accounted for by considering
merely the frustrated navigation of an individual’s life, or even the
frustrated navigation of many individuals’ lives. We must also
account for the unique frustrations of the citizen, and possibly even
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
the very idea of citizenship itself. Rousseau writes that if society were
understood as a “body,” then “there would be a kind of common
sensorium which would ensure that all parts are coordinated.”
Following this metaphor, undermining the very construct of citizen-
ship would be akin to short-circuiting the nervous system that coord-
inates the body politic. Indeed, there are many types of group
decision-making biases and fallacies that psychology research has
identiﬁed which routinely lead to collective action that does not
reﬂect the collective will (and sometimes, as in the “Abilene
Paradox,” even reﬂects its opposite).10
Can we expand the language of attention and use it to talk across
questions of both individual and general will in order to clarify the
threats the intelligent, industrialized persuasion of the attention
economy poses to life and politics?
If we accept this broader view of attention as something akin to
the operation of the human will, and we pair it with an understanding
of the centrality of the human will for politics, then it’s hard to avoid
viewing the attention economy as a project that ultimately targets
and shapes the foundations of our politics. It is not merely the user,
but indeed the citizen, who is the product.
To develop this wider notion of “attention” in the direction of
the will, both individual and collective, let’s assume (at least for now)
two more types of attention – two more “lights” – in addition to the
“spotlight” of immediate awareness. These “lights” broadly align
with the way the philosopher Harry Frankfurt views the structure of
the human will.
It’s important to note here that I’m not making any sort of
scientiﬁc claim or argument with these distinctions. My interest is
primarily exploratory: think of this as one possible heuristic that
may be useful for piercing through this problem space. Gordon Pask
once called cybernetics “the art and science of manipulating defens-
ible metaphors.”11 This is a ﬁtting description for our task here as
well.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
The “Spotlight”
Our immediate capacities for navigating awareness and
action toward tasks. Enables us to do what we want to do.
The “Starlight”
Our broader capacities for navigating life “by the stars”
of our higher goals and values. Enables us to be who we want to be.
The “Daylight”
Our fundamental capacities – such as reﬂection,
metacognition, reason, and intelligence – that enable us to deﬁne our
goals and values to begin with. Enables us to “want what we want
to want.”
These three “lights” of attention pertain to doing, being, and knowing,
respectively. When each of these “lights” gets obscured, a distinct –
though not mutually exclusive – type of “distraction” results.

1 Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1921). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans.
C. K. Ogden. New York: Dover, 1999.
2 Kay, Paul and Kempton, Willett (1984). What is the Sapir-Whorf
Hypothesis? American Anthropological Society, March.
3 Diogenes Laertius vi. 63; Arrian VII.2.
4 Judt, Tony (2011). Ill Fares the Land: A Treatise on our Present
Discontents. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
5 Rogers, Kenneth (2014). The Attention Complex. New York, NY: Palgrave
Macmillan.
6 Nobre, Anna C. and Kastner, Sabine (eds.) (2014). The Oxford Handbook of
Attention. Oxford University Press.
7 Lavie, Nilli (2005). Distracted and Confused?: Selective Attention Under
Load. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9 (2), 75–82.
8 Mill, John Stuart (1859). On Liberty. London: Longman, Roberts & Green.
9 Franck, Georg (1999). The Economy of Attention. Merkur, 534/535.
10 Harvey, Jerry B. (1988). The Abilene Paradox and Other Meditations on
Management. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
11 Pask, Gordon (1975). The Cybernetics of Human Learning and
Performance. London: Hutchinson
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

The Spotlight
At Netﬂix, we are competing for our customers’ time, so our competitors
include Snapchat, YouTube, sleep, etc.
Reed Hastings, CEO, Netﬂix
Bob Dylan said, “A man is a success if he gets up in the morning and
gets to bed at night, and in between he does what he wants to do.”1
Sometimes our technologies help us do what we want to do. Other
times they don’t. When our technologies fail us in this regard, they
undermine the “spotlight” of our attention. This produces functional
distractions that direct us away from information or actions relevant
to our immediate tasks or goals.
Functional distraction is what’s commonly meant by the word
“distraction” in day-to-day use. This is the sort of distraction that
Huxley called the “mere casual waste products of psychophysio-
logical activity.”2 Like when you sit down at a computer to fulﬁll
all the plans you’ve made, to do all those very responsible and adult
things you know at the back of your mind you absolutely must do, and
yet you don’t: instead, your unconscious mind outruns your conscious
mind, and you ﬁnd yourself, forty-ﬁve minutes later, having read
articles about the global economic meltdown, having watched auto-
playing YouTube videos about dogs who were running while sleeping,
and having voyeured the life achievements of some astonishing per-
centage of people who are willing to publicly admit that they know
you, however little it may actually be the case.
Functional distractions commonly come from notiﬁcations.
Each day, the Android mobile operating system alone sends over
11 billion notiﬁcations to its more than 1 billion users. We widely
encounter notiﬁcations from systems such as email services, social
networks, and mobile applications. For instance, “I was going to turn

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
on the kettle so I could make some tea, but then Candy Crush
reminded me I haven’t played in a few days.” Another major source
of notiﬁcations is person-to-person communication, as in instant
messaging applications. Often, as in Google’s Gmail system, notiﬁca-
tions are colored red and placed in the upper-right corner of the user’s
vision in order to better grab their attention and maximize the per-
suasive effect. This effect relies on the human reaction to the color
red,3 as well as the cleaning/grooming instinct,4 which often makes it
hard to resist clicking on the notiﬁcations.
The effects of interruptions aren’t limited to the amount of time
we lose engaging with them directly. When a person is in a focus state
and gets interrupted, it takes on average twenty-three minutes for
them to regain their focus. In addition, experiencing a functional
distraction in your environment can make it harder to return your
attention to that same place in your environment later if something
task-salient appears there.5 Also, functional distractions may direct
your attention away not merely from perceptual information, but also
from reﬂective information. For example, when an app notiﬁcation or
instant message from another person interrupts your focus or “ﬂow,”
it may introduce information that crowds out other task-relevant
information in your working memory.6 In other words, the persuasive
designs of the attention economy compete not only against one
another for your attention, but also against things in your inner
environment as well. Furthermore, exposure to repeated notiﬁcations
can create mental habits that train users to interrupt themselves, even
in the absence of the technologies themselves.7 We tend to overlook
the harms of functional distraction due to the bite-size nature of its
inﬂuence. However, as the philosopher Matthew Crawford writes,
“Distractibility might be regarded as the mental equivalent of
obesity.” From this perspective, individual functional distractions
can be viewed as akin to individual potato chips.
Undermining the spotlight of attention can frustrate our political
lives in several ways. One is by distracting us away from political
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
information and toward some nonpolitical type of information. This
effect doesn’t necessarily have to be consciously engineered. For
instance, a news website might give me the option of viewing the
latest update on my government’s effort to reform tax policy, but it
may place it on the page next to another article with a headline that’s
teasing some juicy piece of celebrity gossip – and whose photo is
undoubtedly better at speaking to my automatic self and getting me
to click.
At the same time, distraction away from political information
could occur by design, for instance via the propagandizing efforts of a
political party or some other interested actor. For example, the
Chinese government has been known to censor information online
that they deem objectionable by suppressing or removing it. However,
their propaganda organization, commonly known as the “50 Cent
Party,” has recently begun using a technique called “reverse censor-
ship,” or “strategic distraction,” to drown out the offending infor-
mation with a torrent of other social media content that directs
people’s attention away from the objectionable material. The Harvard
researchers who carried out a study analyzing these efforts estimate
that the Chinese government creates 448 million posts on social
media per year as part of this strategic distraction.8 As researcher
Margaret Roberts said in an interview, “the point isn’t to get people
to believe or care about the propaganda; it’s to get them to pay less
attention to stories the government wants to suppress.”9
A “strategic distraction” may also be used to change the focus of
a political debate. Here it is hard to avoid discussion of US President
Donald J. Trump’s use of the Twitter microblogging platform. A major
function of his Twitter use has been to deﬂect attention away from
scandalous or embarrassing news stories that may reﬂect poorly on
him. Similarly, in the 2016 US presidential election, he used his so-
called “tweetstorms” to “take all of the air out of the room,” in other
words, to gain the attention of television and radio news broadcasters
and thereby capture as much of their ﬁnite airtime as possible, leaving
little airtime for other candidates to capture. One study estimated

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
that eight months before the 2016 election, he had already captured
almost $2 billion worth of free or “earned” media coverage.10
In addition to this bulk approach, he also deployed highly targeted
functional distraction. For example, consider his campaign’s voter
suppression efforts, which used Facebook to send highly targeted
messages to African Americans (techniques which, while outrageous,
used fairly standard digital advertising methods).11
Functional distraction can certainly be politically consequential, but
it’s unlikely that an isolated instance of a compromised “spotlight”
would pose the sort of fundamental risk to individual and collective
will that we’re ultimately concerned with addressing here. To identify
those deeper risks, it’s necessary to move quickly to the deeper types
of distraction.

1 Dylan, Bob (2006). Dylan, The Essential Interviews, ed. J. Cott. New York,
NY: Wenner Books.
2 Huxley, Aldous and Smith, Huston (2013). Distractions-I. The Divine
Within: Selected Writings on Enlightenment. New York, NY: Harper
Perennial.
3 Elliot, A. J., Maier, M. A., Moller, A. C., Friedman, R. and Meinhardt, J.
(2007). Color and Psychological Functioning: The Effect of Red on
Performance Attainment. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 136 (1),
154–168.
4 Curtis, Valerie A. (2007). Dirt, Disgust and Disease: A Natural History of
Hygiene. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 61, 660–664.
5 Posner, M. I., Rafal, R. D., Choate, L. S. and Vaughan, J. (1985). Inhibition
of Return: Neural Basis and Function. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 2 (3),
211–228.
6 Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly (2008). Flow: The Psychology of Optimal
Experience. New York, NY: Harper Perennial.
7 Mark, G., Gudith, D. and Klocke, U. (2008). The Cost of Interrupted Work:
More Speed and Stress. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems.
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
8 King, G., Pan, J., Roberts, M. E., Allen, D., Bol, P., Fair, B. and Zheng,
C. (2017). How the Chinese Government Fabricates Social Media Posts for
Strategic Distraction, Not Engaged Argument. Research article. https://
gking.harvard.edu/ﬁles/gking/ﬁles/50c.pdf
9 Illing, Sean (2017). China is Perfecting a New Method for Suppressing
Dissent on the Internet. Vox, August 2. www.vox.com/world/2017/8/2/
16019562/china-russia-internet-propaganda-media
10 Confessore, Nicholas and Yourish, Karen (2016). $2 Billion Worth of Free
Media for Donald Trump. New York Times, March 16. www.nytimes.com/
2016/03/16/upshot/measuring-donald-trumps-mammoth-advantage-in-
free-media.html
11 Green, Joshua and Issenberg, Sasha (2016). Inside the Trump Bunker, with
12 Days to Go. Bloomberg Businessweek, October 27. www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2016-10-27/inside-the-trump-bunker-with-12-days-to-go

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

The Starlight
[Donald Trump’s candidacy] may not be good for America, but it’s damn
good for CBS.
Les Moonves (CBS Chairman/CEO), February 2016
Around the time I started feeling existentially compromised by the
deep distractions collecting in my life, I developed a habit that quickly
became annoying to everyone around me. It went like this: I’d hear
someone use a phrase to describe me that had a certain ring to it, like
it would make a good title for something – but its content was both
speciﬁc and odd enough that if it were used as the title for a biography
about my whole life, it would be utterly absurd. Whenever I’d hear
a phrase like that, I’d repeat it with the gravitas of a movie-trailer
announcer,
and
then
follow
it
with
the
phrase:
“The
James
Williams Story.”
Here’s an example. One day, after a long conversation with my
wife, she said to me, “You’re, like, my receptacle of secrets.” To
which I replied: “Receptacle of Secrets: The James Williams Story.”
The joke being, of course, that choosing this one random, speciﬁc
snapshot of my life to represent the narrative of my entire exist-
ence – an existence which has involved many achievements more
notable than hearing and keeping the odd spousal secret – would be
an absurd and arbitrary thing to do. I eventually came to understand
(or perhaps rationalize) this habit as a playful, shorthand way of
stabilizing what philosophers would call my “diachronic self,” or
the self over time, over the increasingly rocky waves of my “syn-
chronic self,” or the self at a given moment. I might have been
overanalyzing it, but I interpreted this emergent habit as a way of
pushing back against my immediate environment’s ability to deﬁne
me. It was a way of saying, “I will not be so easily summarized!”

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
It was a way of trying to hold onto my story by calling attention
to what my story deﬁnitely was not.
We experience our identities as stories, according to a line of
thought
known
as
“narrative
identity
theory.”1
In
his
book
Neuroethics, Neil Levy writes that both synchronic and diachronic
unity are essential for helping us maintain the integrity of these
stories: “We want to live a life that expresses our central values, and
we want that life to make narrative sense: we want to be able to tell
ourselves and others a story, which explains where we come from,
how we got to where we are, and where we are going” (p. 201).
When we lose the story of our identities, whether on individual
or collective levels, it undermines what we could call the “starlight”
of our attention, or our ability to navigate “by the stars” of our
higher values or “being goals.” When our “starlight” is obscured, it
makes it harder to “be who we want to be.” We feel the self frag-
menting and dividing, resulting in an existential sort of distraction.
William James wrote that “our self-feeling in this world depends
entirely on what we back ourselves to be and do.” When we become
aware that our actual habits are in dissonance with our desired
values, this self-feeling often feels like a challenge to, if not the loss
of, our identities.
This obscured “starlight” was a deeper layer of the distractions
I’d been feeling, and I felt that the attention-grabby techniques of
technology design were playing a nontrivial role. I began to realize
that my technologies were enabling habits in my life that led my
actions over time to diverge from the identity and values by which
I wanted to live. It wasn’t just that my life’s GPS was guiding me into
the occasional wrong turn, but rather that it had programmed me a
new destination in a far-off place that it did not behoove me to visit. It
was a place that valued short-term over long-term rewards, simple
over complex pleasures. It felt like I was back in my high-school
calculus class, and all these new technologies were souped-up ver-
sions of Tetris. It wasn’t just that my tasks and goals were giving way
to theirs – my values were as well.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
One way I saw the “starlight” getting obscured in myself and others,
in both the personal and political domains, was in the proliferation of
pettiness. Pettiness means pursuing a low-level goal as though it were
a higher, intrinsically valuable one. Low-level goals tend to be short-
term goals; where this is so, pettiness may be viewed as a kind of
imprudence. In The Theory of Moral Sentiments, Adam Smith calls
prudence the virtue that’s “most useful to the individual.” For Smith,
prudence involves the union of two things: (1) our capacity for
“discerning the remote consequences of all our actions,” and (2)
“self-command, by which we are enabled to abstain from present
pleasure or to endure present pain, in order to obtain a greater pleasure
or to avoid a greater pain in some future time.”
In my own life I saw this pettiness, this imprudence, manifest-
ing in the way the social comparison dynamics of social media plat-
forms had trained me to prioritize mere “likes” or “favorites,” or to
get as many “friends” or “connections” as possible, over pursuing
other more meaningful relational aims. These dynamics had made
me more competitive for other people’s attention and afﬁrmation
than I ever remember being: I found myself spending more and more
time trying to come up with clever things to say in my social posts,
not because I felt they were things worth saying but because I had
come to value these attentional signals for their own sake. Social
interaction had become a numbers game for me, and I was focused
on “winning” – even though I had no idea what winning looked like.
I just knew that the more of these rewarding little social validations
I got, the more of them I wanted. I was hooked.
The creators of these mechanisms didn’t necessarily intend to
make me, or us, into petty people. The creator of the Facebook “like”
button, for instance, initially intended for it to send “little bits of
positivity” to people.2 If its design had been steered in the right way,
perhaps it might have done so. However, soon enough the “like”
function
began
to
serve
the
data-collection
and
engagement-
maximizing interests of advertisers. As a result, the metrics that
comprised the “score” of my social game – and I, as the player of that
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
game – were directly serving the interests of the attention economy.
In the pettiness of my day-to-day number-chasing, I had lost the
higher view of who I really was, or why I wanted to communicate
with all these people in the ﬁrst place.
Pettiness is not exactly a rare phenomenon in the political
domain.
However,
during
the
2016
US
presidential
election
I encountered a highly moralized variant of pettiness coming from
people I would have never expected to see it in. Over the course of just
a few months, I witnessed several acquaintances back in Texas – good,
loving people, and deeply religious “values voters” – go from vocally
rejecting one particular candidate as being morally reprehensible and
utterly unacceptable, to ultimately setting aside those foundational
moral commitments in the name of securing a short-term political
win. By the time a video emerged of the candidate bragging about
committing sexual assault, this petty overwriting of moral commit-
ment with political expediency was so total as to render this stagger-
ing development barely shrug-worthy. By then, their posts on social
media were saying things like, “I care more about what Hillary did
than what Trump said!”
In the 2016 presidential election campaign, Donald Trump took
the dominance of pettiness over prudence to new heights. Trump is
very straightforwardly an embodiment of the dynamics of clickbait:
he’s the logical product (though not endpoint) in the political domain
of a petty media environment deﬁned by impulsivity and zero-sum
competition for our attention. One analyst has estimated that Trump
is worth $2 billion to Twitter, which amounts to almost one-ﬁfth of
the company’s current value.3 His success metrics – number of rally
attendees, number of retweets – are attention economy metrics.
Given this, it’s remarkable how consistently societal discussion has
completely misread him by casting him in informational, rather than
attentional, terms. Like clickbait or so-called “fake news,” the design
goal of Trump is not to inform but to induce. Content is incidental to
effect.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
At its extreme, this pettiness can manifest as narcissism, a preoccu-
pation with being recognized by others, valuing attention for its
own sake, and the prioritization of fame as a core value. A meta-
analysis of ﬁfty-seven studies found that social media in particular
is linked with increased narcissism.4 Another study found that
young people are now getting more plastic surgery due to pressure
from social media.5 And a study of children’s television shows in
recent years found that, rather than pro-social community values,
the main value now held up by children’s television shows as being
most worth pursuing is fame.6 In his historical study of fame The
Frenzy of Renown, Leo Braudy writes that when we call someone
“famous,” what we’re fundamentally saying is, “pay attention to
this.” So it’s entirely to be expected that in an age of information
abundance and attention scarcity we would see an increased
reliance on fame as a heuristic for determining what and who
matters (i.e. merits our attention), as well as an increased desire
for achieving fame in one’s own lifetime (as opposed to a legacy
across generations).7
Sometimes the desire for fame can have life-and-death conse-
quences. Countless YouTube personalities walk on the edges of sky-
scrapers, chug whole bottles of liquor, and perform other dangerous
stunts, all for the fame – and the advertising revenue – it might bring
them. The results are sometimes tragic. In June 2017 a man concocted
an attention-getting YouTube stunt in which he instructed his wife,
who was then pregnant with their second child, to shoot a handgun
from point-blank range at a thick book he was holding in front of his
chest. The bullet ripped through the book and struck and killed him.
As the New York Times reported:
It was a preventable death, the sheriff said, apparently fostered
by a culture in which money and some degree of stardom can be
obtained by those who attract a loyal internet following with
their antics.
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
In the couple’s last video, posted on Monday, Ms. Perez and her
boyfriend considered what it would be like to be one of those stars –
“when we have 300,000 subscribers.”
“The bigger we get, I’ll be throwing parties,” Mr. Ruiz said. “Why
not?”8
Similarly, on the video-game live-streaming site Twitch, a 35-year-old
man stayed awake to continue his streaming marathon for so long
that he died.9 And in December 2017, Wu Yongning, a Chinese man
known as a “rooftopper” – someone who dangles from skyscrapers
without safety equipment in order to post and monetize the video
online – fell to his death. As one user on the Chinese microblogging
service Weibo reﬂected about the role, and responsibility, of the man’s
approving audience members:
Watching him and praising him was akin to . . . buying a knife for
someone who wanted to stab himself, or encouraging someone who
wants to jump off a building. . . . Don’t click “like,” don’t click
“follow.” This is the least we can do to try to save someone’s life.10
There’s nothing wrong with wanting attention from other people.
Indeed, it’s only human. Receiving the attention of others is a neces-
sary, and often quite meaningful, part of human life. In fact, Adam
Smith argues in Wealth of Nations that it’s the main reason we pursue
wealth in the ﬁrst place: “To be attended to, to be taken notice of with
sympathy, complacency, and approbation,” he writes, “are all the
advantages which we can propose to derive from it.” It’s this approval,
this regard from others, he says, that leads people to pursue wealth –
and when they do attain wealth, and then “expend it,” it’s that
expenditure – what we might call the exchange of monetary wealth
for attentional, or reputational, wealth – that Smith describes as being
“led by an invisible hand.”11 So, on a certain reading, one could argue
that all economies are ultimately economies of attention. However,
this doesn’t mean that all attention is worth receiving, or that all ways
of pursuing it are praiseworthy.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
We can also see the obscuring of our starlight in the erosion of our
sense of the nature and importance of our higher values. In Mike
Judge’s ﬁlm Idiocracy, a man awakes from cryogenic slumber in a
distant future where everyone has become markedly stupider. At one
point in the story he visits a shambolic Costco warehouse store,
where a glazed-eyed front-door greeter welcomes him by mechanic-
ally droning, “Welcome to Costco. I love you.” This is an extreme
example of the dilution of a higher value – in this case, love. In the
design of digital technologies, persuasive goals often go by names that
sound lofty and virtuous but have been similarly diluted: “relevance,”
“engagement,” “smart,” and so on. Designing users’ lives toward
diluted values leads to the dilution of their own values at both indi-
vidual and collective levels.
Consider that across many liberal democracies the percentage of
people who say it’s “essential” to live in a democracy has in recent
years been in freefall. The “starlight” of democratic values seems to
be dimming across diverse cultures, languages, and economic situ-
ations. However, one of the few factors these countries do have in
common is their dominant form of media, which just happens to be
the largest, most standardized, and most centralized form of atten-
tional control in human history, and which also happens to distract
from our “starlight” by design.
Similarly, in the last two decades the percentage of Americans
who approve of military rule (saying it would be either “good” or
“very good”) has doubled, according to the World Values Survey,
to now being one in six people.12 The authors of a noted study on
this topic point out that this percentage “has risen in most mature
democracies, including Germany, Sweden, and the United King-
dom.” Crucially, they also note that this trend can’t be attributed
to
economic
hardship.
“Strikingly,”
the
authors
write,
“such
undemocratic sentiments have risen especially quickly among the
wealthy,” and even more so among the young and wealthy. Today,
this approval of military rule “is held by 35 percent of rich young
Americans.”13
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
On the part of political representatives, this value dilution
manifests as the prioritization of metrics that look very much like
attention economy metrics, as well as the placing of party over coun-
try. As Rousseau wrote in Political Economy, when a sense of duty is
no longer present among political leaders, they simply focus on “fas-
cinating the gaze of those whom they need” in order to stay in power.
Our information and communication technologies serve as mirrors
for our identities, and these mirrors can show us either digniﬁed or
undigniﬁed reﬂections of ourselves. When we see a life in the mirror
that appears to be diverging from the “stars” of freedom and self-
authorship by which we want to live, our reaction not only involves
the shock of indignity, but also quite often a defensive posture of
“reactance.” Reactance refers to the idea “that individuals have cer-
tain freedoms with regard to their behavior. If these behavioral
freedoms are reduced or threatened with reduction, the individual
will be motivationally aroused to regain them.”14 In other words,
when we feel our freedom being restricted, we tend to want to ﬁght
to get it back.
To take one example of an undigniﬁed reﬂection that prompts
this sort of reactance, consider the Facebook “emotional contagion”
experiment that Facebook and researchers at Cornell University
carried out in 2014. The experiment used the Facebook news feed to
identify evidence of social contagion effects (i.e. transference of emo-
tional valence). Over a one-week period, the experiment reduced the
number of either positive or negative posts that a sample of around
700,000 Facebook users saw in their News Feed. They found that
when users saw fewer negative posts, their own posts had a lower
percentage of words that were negative. The same was true for posi-
tive posts and positive words. While the effect sizes were very small,
the results showed a clear persuasive effect on the emotional content
of users’ posts.15
In response, some raised questions about research ethics pro-
cesses – but many objections were also about the mere fact that

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Facebook had manipulated its users at all. Clay Johnson, the founder
of political marketing ﬁrm Blue State Digital, wrote, “the Facebook
‘transmission of anger’ experiment is terrifying.”16 The Atlantic
described the study as “Facebook’s Secret Mood Manipulation
Experiment.”17 A member of the UK parliament called for an “investi-
gation into how Facebook and other social networks manipulated
emotional and psychological responses of users by editing information
supplied to them.”18 And privacy activist Lauren Weinstein wrote on
Twitter, “I wonder if Facebook KILLED anyone with their emotion
manipulation stunt. At their scale and with depressed people out
there, it’s possible.”19
We are manipulated by the design of our media all the time.
This seems to me simply another way of describing what media is and
does. Much, if not most, of the advertising research that occurs behind
the closed doors of companies could be described as “secret mood
manipulation experiments.” And the investigation the UK parliamen-
tarian called for would effectively mean investigating the design of all
digital media that shape our attention in any way whatsoever.
What was unfortunately missed in the outrage cascades about
this experiment was the fact that Facebook was ﬁnally measuring
whether a given design had a positive or negative effect on people’s
emotions – something that they don’t appear to have been doing
before this time. This is precisely the sort of knowledge that allows
the public to say, “We know you can measure this now – so start
using it for our beneﬁt!” But that potential response was, as it is so
often, ultimately scuppered by the dynamics of the attention econ-
omy itself.
If a person were to interpret Facebook’s alteration of their news
feed as unacceptable manipulation, and object to the image – the
“undigniﬁed reﬂection” – of themselves as someone who is not fully
in control of their decisions about what they write in their own posts,
then they would see their use of Facebook as incompatible with, and
unsupportive of, the ultimate “being goal” they have for themselves.
The sense of a precipitous sliding backward from that ultimate goal
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
would, as discussed above, have the effect of undermining that per-
son’s sense of self-integrity, and would thus reduce their sense of
dignity.
Finally, when we start to lose the story of our shared identity, it has
major implications for politics. We ﬁnd it harder to keep in view the
commonalities we have with others in our own society. We struggle
to imagine them inhabiting the same space or demos as us, especially
when we’re increasingly physically isolated from them. Division itself
is not bad, of course: isolation is necessary for the development of
individual views and opinions. Diversity requires division, of a sort.
But the sort of division that removes the space in which the common
interest and general will may be found is the sort that is extremely
problematic.
This erosion of shared identity is often mischaracterized as
political “polarization.” However, “polarization” suggests a rational
disunity, mere disagreement about political positions or assumptions.
In essence, a disunity of ideas. What we have before us, on the other
hand, seems a profoundly irrational disunity – a disunity of identity –
and indeed a “deep-self discordance” among the body politic. This can
lead to collective akrasia, or weakness of will. As the philosopher
Charles Taylor writes, “the danger is not actual despotic control but
fragmentation – that is, a people increasingly less capable of forming a
common purpose and carrying it out.”20 William James, in The Prin-
ciples of Psychology, writes, “There is no more miserable human
being than one in whom nothing is habitual but indecision.”21 Per-
haps we could say the same of societies as well.
Rousseau argued that a collective decision can depart from the
general will if people are “misled by particular interests . . . by the
inﬂuence and persuasiveness of a few clever men.”22 This can, of
course, happen via mere functional distraction, or inhibition of the
“spotlight,” but Rousseau notes that this control more often happens
by subdividing society into groups, which leads them to “abandon”

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
their “membership” of the wider group. At extremes, groups may
diverge so much from one another that their insularity becomes
self-reinforcing. And when this division of identity becomes moral-
ized in such a way that it leads to a deeper sort of tribalistic delegiti-
mizing, it veers toward a certain kind of populism, which I will
discuss in the next chapter.
Here at the level of the “starlight,” however, this division has
primarily prompted lamentations about the problems of internet
“echo chambers,”23 or self-reinforcing “bubbles of homophily.”24
Yet the echoic metaphor seems to me to miss something essential:
while echoes do bounce back, the sound ultimately dissipates.
A better metaphor might be ampliﬁer feedback, that is, holding a live
microphone up to a speaker to create an instant shrieking loop that
will destroy your eardrums if you let it. When the content of that
shrieking loop consists of our own identities, whether individually or
as groups, the distorted reﬂection we see in the “mirror” of technol-
ogy takes on the character of a funhouse mirror, giving us only an
absurd parody of ourselves.
Considering the ways my “starlight” was being obscured helped me
broaden the scope of “distraction” to include not just frustrations of
doing, but also frustrations of being over time. This sort of distrac-
tion makes us start to lose the story, at both individual and collect-
ive levels. When that happens, we start to grasp for things that feel
real, true, or authentic in order to get the story back. We try to
reorient our living toward the values and higher goals we want to
pursue.
But here, at least, we still know when we’re not living by
our chosen stars – we can still in principle detect the errors and
correct them. It seemed like there was one deeper level of
“distraction” to contend with: the sort of distraction that would
threaten our ability to know and deﬁne what our goals and values
are in the ﬁrst place.
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

1 Schechtman, Marya (1996). The Constitution of Selves. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
2 Lewis, Paul (2017). Our Minds can be Hijacked: The Tech Insiders Who
Fear a Smartphone Dystopia. Guardian, October 5. www.theguardian.com/
technology/2017/oct/05/smartphone-addiction-silicon-valley-dystopia
3 Wittenstein, Jeran (2017). What is Trump Worth to Twitter? One
Analyst Estimates $2 Billion. Bloomberg Businessweek, August 17.
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-08-17/what-is-trump-worth-to-
twitter-one-analyst-estimates-2-billion
4 Gnambs, Timo and Appel, Markus (2017). Narcissism and Social
Networking Behavior: A Meta-Analysis. Journal of Personality, 23 March.
DOI: 10.1111/jopy.12305
5 Hughes, Dominic (2017). Social Media Pressure is Linked to Cosmetic
Procedure Boom. BBC News. www.bbc.com/news/health-40358138
6 Ulhs, Yalda T. and Greenﬁeld, Patricia M. (2007). The Rise of Fame:
A Historical Content Analysis. Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial
Research on Cyberspace, 5 (1).
7 Braudy, Leo (1997). The Frenzy of Renown: Fame and its History.
New York: Vintage.
8 Stevens, Matt (2017). A Stunt Turns Deadly for a Couple Seeking YouTube
Fame. New York Times, August 29. www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/us/
shooting-youtube-stunt-minnesota.html
9 Devlin, K. (2017). The Mysterious Death of a Live-Streaming Gamer. BBC
News. www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-trending-39232620
10 Wong, Tessa (2017). Wu Yongning: Who is to Blame for a Daredevil’s
Death? BBC News. www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-42335014
11 Smith, Adam (1776). The Wealth of Nations.
12 Taub, Amanda (2016). How Stable are Democracies? Warning Signs are
Flashing Red. New York Times, November 29. www.nytimes.com/2016/
11/29/world/americas/western-liberal-democracy.html
13 Foa, R. S., Mounk, Y., Inglehart, R. F., Carter, B. L., Yarwood, J.,
Reyntjens, F., Watanabe, A. (2016). The Danger of Deconsolidation
The Struggle Over Term Limits in Africa Delegative Democracy Revisited.
Journal of Democracy, 27 (3). www.journalofdemocracy.org/sites/default/
ﬁles/Foa%26Mounk-27-3.pdf

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
14 Brehm, Jack W. (1966). A Theory of Psychological Reactance. Oxford:
Academic Press.
15 Kramer, A. D. I., Guillory, J. E. and Hancock, J. T. (2014). Experimental
Evidence of Massive-Scale Emotional Contagion Through Social
Networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 111 (24), 8788–8790.
16 Johnson, Clay (2014). In the wake of both the Snowden stuff and the
Cuba twitter stuff, the Facebook “transmission of anger” experiment is
terrifying. @cjoh, June 28.
17 Meyer, Robinson (2014). Everything We Know About Facebook’s Secret
Mood Manipulation Experiment. Atlantic, June 28. www.theatlantic.com/
technology/archive/2014/06/everything-we-know-about-facebooks-secret-
mood-manipulation-experiment/373648
18 Booth, Robert (2014). Facebook Reveals News Feed Experiment to Control
Emotions. Guardian, June 29. www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/
jun/29/facebook-users-emotions-news-feeds
19 Goel, Vindu (2014). Facebook Tinkers with Users’ Emotions in News Feed
Experiment, Stirring Outcry. New York Times, August 30.
www.nytimes.com/2014/06/30/technology/facebook-tinkers-with-users-
emotions-in-news-feed-experiment-stirring-outcry.html
20 Taylor, Charles (1991). The Malaise of Modernity. Toronto: House of
Anansi.
21 James, William, Principles of Psychology.
22 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1755). A Discourse on Political Economy.
23 Pazzanese, Christina (2017). Danger in the Internet Echo Chamber.
Harvard Law Today, March 24. https://today.law.harvard.edu/danger-
internet-echo-chamber/
24 Lee, E., Karimi, F., Jo, H.-H., Strohmaier, M. and Wagner, C. (2017).
Homophily Explains Perception Biases in Social Networks. Research
paper. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.08601.pdf. Thompson, Derek (2017).
Everybody’s in a Bubble, and that’s a Problem. Atlantic. www.theatlantic
.com/business/archive/2017/01/america-bubbles/514385/
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

The Daylight
When men yield up the privilege of thinking, the last shadow of liberty
quits the horizon.
Thomas Paine, Common Sense
The third, and most profound, level of attention is the “daylight.” By
this I mean the suite of foundational capacities that enable us to
deﬁne our goals and values in the ﬁrst place, to “want what we want
to want.” When our daylight is compromised, epistemic distraction
results. Epistemic distraction is the diminishment of underlying cap-
acities that enable a person to deﬁne or pursue their goals: capacities
essential for democracy such as reﬂection, memory, prediction, leis-
ure, reasoning, and goal-setting. This is where the distractions of the
attention economy most directly undermine the foundations of
democracy.
Epistemic distraction can make it harder to “integrate associ-
ations across many different experiences to detect common structures
across them.” These commonalities “form abstractions, general prin-
ciples, concepts, and symbolisms that are the medium of the sophis-
ticated, ‘big-picture’ thought needed for truly long-term goals.”1 In the
absence of this capacity to effectively plan one’s own projects and
goals, our automatic, bottom-up processes take over. Thus, at its
extreme, epistemic distraction produces what Harry Frankfurt refers
to as “wantonness” because it removes reﬂected-upon, intentional
reasons for action, leaving only impulsive reasons in its wake.2
I call this type of distraction “epistemic” for two reasons. First,
it distracts from knowledge of the world (both outer and inner) that’s
necessary for someone to be able to function as a purposeful, compe-
tent agent. Second, it constitutes what the philosopher Miranda
Fricker calls an “epistemic injustice,” in that it harms a person in

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
their ability to be a “knower” (in this case, a knower of both the world
and of oneself ).3 Like existential distraction, epistemic distraction
also has an impact on both autonomy and dignity. It violates the
integrity of the self by undermining the necessary preconditions for
it to exist and to thrive, thus pulling the carpet out from under one’s
feet, so to speak.
Our daylight may be obscured when our capacities for knowing
what’s true, or for predicting what’s likely to be true, are undermined.
The undermining of truth can happen via the phenomenon of “fake
news,” which Collins Dictionary selected as its 2017 Word of the
Year, deﬁning it as “false, often sensational, information dissemin-
ated under the guise of news reporting.”4 An Oxford University study
found that during the 2016 US election, Twitter users posted more
“misinformation, polarizing and conspiratorial content” than real
news articles.5 The Pope has gone so far as to call fake news a “grave
sin that hurts the heart of the journalist and hurts others.”6 Our
capacities for prediction may also be undermined by the attention
economy, for instance when the practice of statistical opinion polling
itself becomes subjugated to its incentives. Especially during major
elections, it now seems that small, meaningless day-to-day changes in
candidates’ probabilities of winning serve as the “rewards” drawing
readers back to websites whose ultimate aim is to garner page views
and clicks. (When this effect occurs by design, perhaps we could call it
“statbait,” or statistical clickbait.)
Our daylight can also be obscured via the diminishment of
intelligence or other cognitive capacities. A Hewlett-Packard study
found that distractions decreased the IQ scores of knowledge workers
by 10 points, which the researchers note is “twice the decline
recorded for those smoking marijuana.”7 Similarly, researchers at
the University of Texas found that the mere presence of one’s smart-
phone can adversely affect available working memory capacity and
functional ﬂuid intelligence.8 Also of relevance here are physiological
effects, such as the stress produced by “email apnea,” a phenomenon
that occurs when a person opens their email inbox to ﬁnd many
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
unread messages, inducing a “ﬁght-or-ﬂight” response that causes the
person to stop breathing.9 In addition, recent research has also associ-
ated social media usage with increased social anxiety, depression, and
lower mood.10 Another source of anxiety is the phenomenon of
“cyberchondria,” which is deﬁned as the “unfounded escalation
of concerns about common symptomatology, based on the review of
search results and literature on the Web.” A 2009 study found that
escalatory terminology on the pages users visit – which serves, as do
clickbait headlines, to increase page views and other engagement
metrics – plays a key role in this process.11
Reﬂection is an essential ingredient for the kind of thinking that helps
us determine “what we want to want.” For the American philosopher
Christine Korsgaard, reﬂection is the way we “turn our attention on
to our own mental activities” in order to “call our beliefs and motives
into question.”12 When the technologies of our attention inhibit our
capacities for reﬂection, our “daylight” gets obscured in ways that
have particular implications for politics. For instance, notiﬁcations or
addictive mobile apps may ﬁll up those little moments in the day
during which a person might have otherwise reﬂected on their goals
and priorities. Users check their phones an average of 150 times per
day13 (and touch them over 2,600 times per day),14 so that would add
up to a lot of potential reﬂection going unrealized.
Closely related to the task of reﬂection is the activity of leisure.
We often conﬂate leisure with entertainment. However, properly
understood, leisure is akin to what Aristotle called “periodic non-
thought”.15 It’s that unstructured downtime that serves as the ground
out of which one’s true self bubbles forth. This sort of unstructured
thought is of particular developmental importance for children.16 The
philosopher Josef Pieper even argued in 1948 that leisure is “the basis
of culture,” the unconscious ground out of which not only individual
but also collective values and meaning-making processes emerge.17
Leisure also uniquely enables the kind of thinking and deliber-
ation necessary for the thoughtful invention of societal institutions.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
The philosopher Hannah Arendt saw this as being particularly true
when it comes to the design of democratic systems worth having.18 In
an unpublished lecture, she writes about the authors of the United
States’ institutions of government:
No doubt, it is obvious and of great consequence that this passion
for freedom for its own sake awoke in and was nourished by men of
leisure, by the hommes de lettres who had no masters and were not
always busy making a living. In other words, they enjoyed the
privileges of Athenian and Roman citizens without taking part in
those affairs of state that so occupied the freemen of antiquity.
Needless to add, where men live in truly miserable conditions this
passion for freedom is unknown.19
“Leisure” here for Arendt seems to mean more than just “non-
thought” or reﬂection: in counterposing it with work, she seems to be
using the term to refer to something like a respite from having to
perform attentional labor. A line from Theodore Roethke’s 1963 poem
“Inﬁrmity” comes to mind: “A mind too active is no mind at all / The
deep eye sees the shimmer on the stone . . .” The busy demands of
making a living can make a mind too active, but so can the busy
demands of notiﬁcations, never-ending feeds of information, persua-
sive appeals, endless entertainment options, and all the other pings on
our attention that the digital attention economy throws our way. This
seems to suggest that there’s an opportunity to clarify where and how
our interactions with the forces of the attention economy could be
considered a kind of attentional labor, and what the implications of
that characterization might be for the kinds of freedom we look to
leisure to sustain.
However, the most visible and consequential form of compromised
“daylight” we see in the digital attention economy today is the preva-
lence and centrality of moral outrage. Moral outrage consists of more
than just anger: it also includes the impulse to judge, punish, and
shame someone you think has crossed a moral line. You’re most
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
likely to experience moral outrage when you feel not merely angry
about some perceived misdeed, but angry and disgusted.20
Moral outrage played a useful role earlier in human evolution,
when people lived in small nomadic groups: it enabled greater
accountability, cooperation, and in-group trust.21 However, the amp-
liﬁcation of moral outrage on a societal, or even global, scale carries
dire implications for the pursuit of politics worth having. In the past,
when we lived in environments of information scarcity, all the
world’s moral transgressions weren’t competing for our attention
every day. According to a study in the US and Canada, less than
5 percent of the population will ever personally experience a truly
moral misdeed in real life.22 However, in the era of smartphones,
if
anyone
experiences
a
misdeed,
then
everyone
potentially
experiences it.
On an almost daily basis now, it seems the entire internet – that
is to say, we – erupt in outrage at some perceived moral transgression
whose news has cascaded across the web, or gone “viral.” Virality, the
mass transmission of some piece of information across a network, is
biased toward certain types of information over others. Since the
1960s, it’s been widely held that bad news spreads more quickly and
easily than good news.23 More recent research building upon this idea
has shown that it’s not only the emotional “valence” of the infor-
mation – namely, how good or bad it makes you feel – that inﬂuences
whether or not you’ll share it, but also the degree to which the
particular emotion you experience produces an “arousal response”
in you, namely makes you more physiologically alert and attentive.24
In other words, if you’ve got two equally “bad” pieces of news to share
with your friends, one of which makes you feel sad and the other
angry – but you only want to share one of them – then odds are you’ll
share the one that angers you, because anger’s a high-arousal emotion
whereas sadness is low-arousal.
Here’s just one example of the kind of webwide outrage cascade
I’m talking about. In July of 2015 a dentist from the US state of
Minnesota went hunting in Zimbabwe and killed a well-known lion

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
named Cecil. Cecil’s cause of death was an arrow followed by – after
about forty hours of stumbling around, bleeding, in the wilderness – a
riﬂe round. Cecil was then decapitated and ﬂown to Minnesota as the
trophy of a victorious hunt. It cost around $50,000 to kill Cecil. It may
not have been legal.
When the story of Cecil’s demise went “viral,” the whole inter-
net seemed to roar in outrage all at once. On Twitter, Cecil’s memorial
hashtag, #CecilTheLion, received 670,000 tweets in just twenty-four
hours.25 Comedian Jimmy Kimmel called the Minnesotan dentist
“the most hated man in America who never advertised Jell-O on
television.” Actress Mia Farrow tweeted the dentist’s address.26
Crowds appeared at his ofﬁce to yell “Murderer! Terrorist!” through
megaphones and to display homemade signs suggesting that he “ROT
IN HELL.” Someone spray-painted “Lion Killer” on his house. Some-
one else took down his professional website. Still others, sitting else-
where in the world, spent hours falsifying one-star Yelp reviews of his
dental practice. On Facebook, the thousand-plus member group that
emerged as the de facto mission control for Cecil’s revenge brigade
was called “Shame Lion Killer Dr. Walter Palmer and River Bluff
Dental.”27
When children behave like this toward one another, we use
words like “cyberbullying” or “harassment.” Yet when it’s adults
doing the shaming and threatening, we’re inclined to shrug our shoul-
ders, or even cheer it as “karma,” “sweet, sweet revenge,” or “justice
in the court of public opinion.” But it isn’t any of those things. It’s
nothing more – and nothing less – than mob rule, a digital Salem. And
today, because the targets of moral outrage can no longer be burned at
the stake (in most places), the implicit goal becomes to destroy them
symbolically, reputationally – we might even say attentionally – for
their transgression.
Yet don’t some transgressions deserve anger, and even outrage?
Certainly. As the famous bumper sticker says: “if you’re not outraged,
you’re not paying attention.” Sometimes, the social pressure that
comes from moral outrage is the only means we have to hold people
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
accountable for their actions, especially when the institutions of
society have failed to do so. For example, in 2011 moral outrage in
Egypt led to the ouster of Hosni Mubarak from the presidency and
advanced the Arab Spring.28 In 2012 in the United States, after the
shooting of Trayvon Martin, an unarmed African American teenager,
moral outrage galvanized national conversations about race, guns, and
accountability in law enforcement.29 And in 2017, moral outrage
ﬁnally gave a hearing to many women whose claims about the sexual
offenses of Harvey Weinstein, widely considered the most powerful
man in Hollywood, had previously been ignored if not outright disbe-
lieved. Upon Weinstein’s exile from the entertainment industry, simi-
lar claims came to light about other ﬁgures in Hollywood and beyond,
ultimately leading to widespread societal reﬂection about issues of
sexual harassment, gender relations, and power dynamics in the
workplace.30
But if justice is our goal – as it should be – then it is not at all
clear that these dynamics of moral outrage and mob rule advance it. If
anything, they seem to lead in the opposite direction.
In her book Anger and Forgiveness, Martha Nussbaum describes
the ways in which anger is morally problematic. She uses Aristotle’s
deﬁnition of anger, which is pretty close to the concept of moral
outrage I gave above: it’s “a desire accompanied by pain for an imagined
retribution on account of an imagined slighting inﬂicted by people
who have no legitimate reason to slight oneself or one’s own.” The
“imagined slighting” and “imagined retribution,” Nussbaum says,
essentially take the form of status downrankings. She argues that much
moralistic behavior, therefore, aims not at justice-oriented but status-
oriented outcomes. For example, virtue signaling often masquerades as
apparently useful or prudent actions, as when people take action to
ensure that sex offenders don’t move to their neighborhood. The real
goal here, says Nussbaum, is one of “lowering the status of sex offend-
ers and raising the status of good people like herself.”
There is, however, one particular type of anger that Nussbaum
views as valuable: what she calls “transition anger.” This refers to anger

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
that is followed by “the Transition,” or the “healthy segue into
forward-looking thoughts of welfare, and, accordingly, from anger into
compassionate hope.” “In a sane and not excessively anxious and status-
focused person,” she writes, “anger’s idea of retribution or payback is a
brief dream or cloud, soon dispelled by saner thoughts of personal and
social welfare.” However, in the attention economy, outrage cascades in
such a way that the “Transition” rarely, if ever, has any chance to occur.
What results, then, is unbridled mobocracy, or mob rule.
One might object here and say that “mob justice” is better than
no justice at all. Nussbaum would seem to disagree: “when there is
great injustice,” she says, “we should not use that fact as an excuse for
childish and undisciplined behavior.” And while “accountability
expresses society’s commitment to important values,” it “does not
require the magical thinking of payback.” In other words, recognizing
that killing Cecil the Lion was the wrong thing to do, and holding
those involved accountable, in no way requires – or justiﬁes – the
status-downranking behaviors of shaming or trying to destroy their
reputations and livelihoods.
In 1838 a young Abraham Lincoln gave a speech at the Lyceum
in Springﬁeld, Illinois in which he warned about the threat that
outrage and the mobocratic impulses it engenders pose for democracy
and justice:
[T]here is, even now, something of ill-omen, amongst us. I mean the
increasing disregard for law which pervades the country; the
growing disposition to substitute the wild and furious passions, in
lieu of the sober judgment of Courts; and the worse than savage
mobs, for the executive ministers of justice . . . Thus, then, by the
operation of this mobocratic spirit, which all must admit, is now
abroad in the land, the strongest bulwark of any Government, and
particularly of those constituted like ours, may effectually be
broken down and destroyed.31
He continued: “There is no grievance that is a ﬁt object of redress by
mob law.” Mobocratic “justice” is no justice worth having, and this is
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
only partly because of the outcomes it tends to produce. It’s also
because of the way mobocracy goes about producing them.
Legal professionals have a saying: “Justice is the process, not the
outcome.”32 The process of mobocratic “justice” fueled by viral out-
rage that cascades online is one of caprice, arbitrariness, and uncer-
tainty. So it should come as no surprise that mob rule is precisely the
path that Socrates, in The Republic, describes as being the path
societies take from democracy back into tyranny.33
Unfortunately, mob rule is hard-coded into the design of the
attention economy. In this way, it can be considered a kind of society-
wide utility function that optimizes for extremism, which may at
times even manifest as terrorism. It creates an environment in which
extremist actors, causes, or groups who feed on outrage can ﬂourish.
As the writer Tobias Rose-Stockwell has put it, “this is the uncom-
fortable truth of terrorism’s prominence in our lives: We have built an
instant distribution system for its actual intent – Terror.”34
On an individual level, the proliferation of outrage creates more
fear and anxiety in our lives. A headline of an article on the satirical
news site The Onion reads, “Blogger Takes Few Moments Every
Morning To Decide Whether To Feel Outraged, Incensed, Or Shocked
By Day’s News.”35 It also contributes to the “stickiness,” or the
compulsive effects of the medium, that keep us “hooked” and con-
tinually coming back for more. It can also skew our view of the world
by giving us the impression that things are much worse than they
actually are. In his essay A Free Man’s Worship, Bertrand Russell
writes, “indignation is still a bondage, for it compels our thoughts to
be occupied with an evil world; and in the ﬁerceness of desire from
which rebellion springs there is a kind of self-assertion which it is
necessary for the wise to overcome.”36 Or, as a worker in a Russian
“troll house” put it, “if every day you are feeding on hate, it eats away
at your soul.”37
When the attention economy ampliﬁes moral outrage in a way that
moralizes political division, it clears the way for the tribalistic

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
impulse to claim for one’s own group the mantle of representing the
“real” or “true” will of the people as a whole. This, for Jan-Werner
Müller in What is Populism?, is the essence of the concept of
“populism.”38
In recent years we’ve witnessed a ﬂood of political events across
Western liberal democracies that have been described as “populist” in
character. Yet the term’s deﬁnition has remained stubbornly mercur-
ial. Some have used it to refer to particularly emotive styles of col-
lective action. Some have used it to mean antielitism, others
antipluralism. And some simply use it to describe a type of politics
that seems vaguely problematic. Our conceptions of populism have
themselves been polarized.
Müller offers a helpful corrective. In his book, he writes that
populism is “a particular moralistic imagination of politics, a way of
perceiving the political world that sets a morally pure and fully
uniﬁed . . . people against elites who are deemed corrupt or in some
other way morally inferior.” He says that “populism is about making
a certain kind of moral claim,” namely that “only some of the people
are really the people.” In The Social Contract, Rousseau warned of the
risk that “particular wills could replace the general will in the deliber-
ations of the people.” Müller’s conception of populism can thus be
seen as a kind of moralized version of that fragmentation of collective
identity. But while the development of Rousseau’s general will
“requires actual participation by citizens; the populist, on the other
hand, can divine the proper will of the people on the basis of what it
means, for instance, to be a ‘real American.’”
The work of Berkeley cognitive linguist George Lakoff is
extremely relevant here. For several years he has been calling atten-
tion to the way in which American politics may be read as the
projection of family systems dynamics onto the body politic: in this
reading, the right is the “strict father” whereas the left is the “nurtur-
ing mother.”39 (It is relevant here to note that in 2004, one of the
highest-correlated views with voting Republican was support for cor-
poral punishment, or “spanking” one’s children.)40 Lakoff explains,
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
“the basic idea is that authority is justiﬁed by morality, and that, in a
well-ordered world, there should be a moral hierarchy in which those
who have traditionally dominated should dominate.” He continues,
“The hierarchy is God above man; man above nature; the rich above
the poor; employers above employees; adults above children; Western
culture above other cultures; our country above other countries. The
hierarchy also extends to men above women, whites above non-
whites, Christians above non-Christians, straights above gays.”
“Since this is seen as a ‘natural’ order,” he continues, “it is not to be
questioned.”41
It’s easy to spot examples of populism, on this particular deﬁn-
ition, across the political spectrum in recent years. On the right, it
manifests as appeals to rural American voters as being “real Americans,”
“birtherism,” or Nigel Farage’s hailing of the UK’s “Brexit” vote as a
“victory for real people.” On the left, it manifests as appeals to “the
99%” (i.e. we are “the people,” if you round up), as well as in various
manifestations of identity politics.
Müller writes that populists “can accurately be described as
‘enemies of institutions’ – although not of institutions in general” –
only “mechanisms of representation that fail to vindicate their
claim to exclusive moral representation.” In this light, calls on the
American left in the wake of the 2016 US presidential election to
abolish the electoral college system (in which Hillary Clinton lost
the electoral vote but won the popular vote) may be read as similarly
“impulsive” desires to get rid of intermediary regulatory systems.
“Everything that liberals from Montesquieu and Tocqueville onward
once lauded as moderating inﬂuences – what they called intermedi-
ate institutions – disappears here in favor of Urbinati’s ‘direct
representation.’”
Importantly, Müller also writes that political crises don’t cause
populism: “a crisis – whether economic, social, or ultimately also
political – does not automatically produce populism” of this sort.
Nor can populism merely be chalked up to “frustration,” “anger,” or
“resentment” – to take such a view would not only be uncharitable

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
but indeed also patronizing, and even a dereliction of one’s duties as a
citizen. As Müller writes, “simply to shift the discussion to social
psychology (and treat the angry and frustrated as potential patients for
a political sanatorium) is to neglect a basic democratic duty to engage
in reasoning.”
Yet the technologies of the digital attention economy don’t
promote or select for the kind of reasoning, deliberation, or under-
standing that’s necessary to take political action beyond the white-hot
ﬂash of outrage and revolution. As Wael Ghonim, the Egyptian activ-
ist who set up the Facebook group that was instrumental in sparking
the Arab Spring, said in a talk called “The Algorithms of Fear”:
We who use the Internet now “like” or we ﬂame – but there’s [very
little] now happening [algorithmically] to drive people into the
more consensus-based, productive discussions we need to have, to
help us make civic progress. Productive discussions aren’t getting
the [media] distribution they deserve. We’re not driving people to
content that could help us, as a society . . . come together without a
ﬂame war . . . You can build algorithms and experiences that are
designed to get the best out of people, and you can build algorithms
and experiences that drive out the worst. It’s our job as civic
technologists to build experiences that drive the best. We can do
that. We must do that now.42
What’s the best part of people that our technologies should be
designed to bring out? What should the system be inducing in us
instead of outrage? Nussbaum writes, “the spirit that should be our
goal has many names: Greek philophrosunē, Roman humanitas,
biblical agapē, African ubuntu – a patient and forbearing disposition
to see and seek the good rather than to harp obsessively on
the bad.”
The problem, of course, is that the “patient and forbearing
disposition to see and seek the good” does not grab eyeballs, and
therefore does not sell ads. “Harping obsessively on the bad,”
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
however, does. As it stands, the dynamics of the attention economy
are thus structurally set up to undermine the most noble aims and
virtues worth pursuing. Again, outrage and anger are not bad – they
are understandable human responses to injustice, and they can even
make us feel happy, in a way.43 However, because the attention
economy contains many incentives to induce anger but none to
induce the “Transition,” outrage rapidly cascades into mobocracy
on a societal, if not global, scale.
By compromising the “daylight” of our attention, then, the
digital attention economy directly militates against the foundations
of democracy and justice. It undermines fundamental capacities that
are preconditions for self-determination at both the individual and
the collective level. In fact, to the extent that we take these funda-
mental capacities to be among our uniquely human guiding lights,
there’s a very real sense in which epistemic distraction literally
dehumanizes.

1 Miller, Earl K. and Buschman, Timothy J. (2014). Natural Mechanisms for
the Executive Control of Attention. The Oxford Handbook of Attention,
ed. Anna C. Nobre and Sabine Kastner. Oxford University Press.
2 Frankfurt, Harry G. (1988). The Importance of What We Care About:
Philosophical Essays. Cambridge University Press.
3 Fricker, Miranda (2007). Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of
Knowing. Oxford University Press.
4 Collins Dictionary (2017). Collins Dictionary Word of the Year.
www.collinsdictionary.com/woty
5 Howard, P. N., Kollanyi, B., Bradshaw, S. and Neudert, L. M. (2017). Social
Media, News and Political Information During the US Election: Was
Polarizing Content Concentrated in Swing States? Data memo, Oxford
Internet Institute. http://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/
89/2017/09/Polarizing-Content-and-Swing-States.pdf
6 Associated Press (2017). Pope Francis: Fake and Sensationalised
News “A Very Serious Sin.” Guardian, December 17.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.theguardian.com/world/2017/dec/17/pope-francis-fake-and-
sensationalised-news-a-very-serious-sin
7 Hemp, Paul (2009). Death by Information Overload. Harvard Business
Review, September. https://hbr.org/2009/09/death-by-information-overload
8 Ward, A. F., Duke, K., Gneezy, A. and Bos, M. W. (2017). Brain Drain: The
Mere Presence of One’s Own Smartphone Reduces Available Cognitive
Capacity. Journal of the Association for Consumer Research, 2 (2),
140–154.
9 Stone, Linda (2008). Just Breathe: Building the Case for Email Apnea.
Hufﬁngton Post blog. www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/linda-stone/just-breathe-
building-the_b_85651.html
10 Kross, E. et al. (2013). Facebook Use Predicts Declines in Subjective
Well-being in Young Adults. PLoS ONE, 8 (8), 1–6. Lin, L. Y. et al. (2016).
Association Between Social Media Use and Depression Among U.S. Young
Adults. Depress Anxiety, 33 (4), 323–331. Ryan, Tracii and Xenos, Sophia
(2011). Who Uses Facebook? An Investigation Into the Relationship
Between the Big Five, Shyness, Narcissism, Loneliness, and Facebook
Usage. Computers in Human Behavior, 27 (5), 1658–1664. Sagioglou,
Christina and Greitemeyer, Tobias (2014). Facebook’s Emotional
Consequences: Why Facebook Causes a Decrease in Mood and Why People
Still Use It. Computers in Human Behavior, 35, 359–363.
11 White, Ryen and Horvitz, Eric (2009). Cyberchondria: Studies of the
Escalation of Medical Concerns in Web Search. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS) 27 (4), 23.
12 Korsgaard, Christine M. (1996). The Sources of Normativity. Cambridge
University Press.
13 Ahonen T. (2013). The Mobile Telecoms Industry Annual Review for 2013.
www.slideshare.net/kleinerperkins/kpcb-internet-trends-2013/52-
Mobile_Users_Reach_to_Phone
14 dscout (2016). Mobile Touches: dscout’s Inaugural Study on Humans and
Their Tech. https://blog.dscout.com/hubfs/downloads /dscout_mobile_
touches_study_2016.pdf
15 North, Paul (2011). The Problem of Distraction. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford
University Press.
16 Barker, J. E. et al. (2014). Less-Structured Time in Children’s Daily Lives
Predicts Self-Directed Executive Functioning. Frontiers in Psychology,
5, 593.
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
17 Pieper, Josef (1948). Leisure: The Basis of Culture and the Philosophical
Act (p. 144). San Francisco, CA: Ignatius Press.
18 Arendt, Hannah (2013). The Human Condition. University of Chicago
Press.
19 Arendt, Hannah (unpublished). Thoughts on Poverty, Misery and the Great
Revolutions of History.
20 Salerno, Jessica and Peter-Hagene, Liana (2013). The Interactive Effect of
Anger and Disgust on Moral Outrage and Judgments. Psychological
Science, August 22. http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/
0956797613486988
21 Crockett, M. J. (2017). Moral Outrage in the Digital Age. Nature
Human Behaviour, 1 (11), 769–771. Panchanathan, Karthik and
Boyd, Robert (2004). Indirect Reciprocity Can Stabilize Cooperation
Without the Second-Order Free Rider Problem. Nature, 432 (7016),
499–502.
22 Hofmann, W., Wisneski, D. C., Brandt, M. J. and Skitka, L. J. (2014).
Replication Data For Morality in Everyday Life. Harvard Dataverse.
23 Galtung, Johan and Ruge, Mari (1965). The Structure of Foreign News: The
Presentation of the Congo, Cuba and Cyprus Crises in Four Norwegian
Newspapers. Journal of Peace Research, 2 (1), 64–90.
24 Dobele, A., Lindgreen, A., Beverland, M., Vanhamme, J. and van Wijk, R.
(2007). Why Pass on Viral Messages? Because They Connect Emotionally.
Business Horizons, 50 (4), 291–304. Berger, Jonah and Milkman, Katherine
L. (2011). Social Transmission, Emotion and the Virality of Online
Content (1–53). Research paper, Operations, Information and Decisions
Department, University of Pennsylvania. http://opim.wharton.upenn.edu/
~kmilkman/Virality.pdf. Rimé, B., Philippot, P., Boca, S. and Mesquita, B.
(1992). Long-lasting Cognitive and Social Consequences of Emotion: Social
Sharing and Rumination. European Review of Social Psychology, 3 (1),
225–258.
25 Valinsky, Jordan (2015). Outrage and Backlash: #CecilTheLion Racks up
670K Tweets in 24 Hours. Digiday. https://digiday.com/marketing/
outrage-backlash-cecilthelion-racks-670k-tweets-24-hours/
26 Chasmar, Jessica (2015). Mia Farrow Tweets Address of Walter Palmer,
Dentist who Killed Cecil the Lion. Washington Times, July 29. www
.washingtontimes.com/news/2015/jul/29/mia-farrow-tweets-address-of-
walter-palmer-dentist/

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
27 Capecchi, C. and Rogers, K. (2015). Killer of Cecil the Lion Finds out that
he is a Target Now, of Internet Vigilantism. New York Times, July 30.
www.nytimes.com/2015/07/30/us/cecil-the-lion-walter-palmer.html
28 Brieﬁng (2017). Once Considered a Boon to Democracy, Social Media Have
Started to Look Like its Nemesis. Economist, November 4. www.economist
.com/news/brieﬁng/21730870-economy-based-attention-easily-gamed-
once-considered-boon-democracy-social-media
29 #BlackLivesMatter Campaign. http://blacklivesmatter.com/
30 #metoo Campaign. https://twitter.com/hashtag/metoo. BBC
Entertainment and Arts (2017). Harvey Weinstein Timeline:
How the Scandal Unfolded. www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-
arts-41594672
31 Lincoln, Abraham (1838). The Perpetuation of our Political Institutions:
Address Before the Young Men’s Lyceum of Springﬁeld, Illinois.
www.abrahamlincolnonline.org/lincoln/speeches/lyceum.htm
32 Kolkey, Daniel M. (1993). Justice is in the Process, not Outcome:
The Racially Mixed Jury in the King Civil-Rights Trial is One Sign that
the System Works. LA Times, March 9. http://articles.latimes.com/1993-
03-09/local/me-991_1_jury-selection-process
33 Plato, Republic.
34 Rose-Stockwell, Tobias (2017). This is How your Fear and Outrage are
Being Sold for Proﬁt. The Mission, July 14. https://medium.com/the-
mission/the-enemy-in-our-feeds-e86511488de
35 The Onion (2015). Blogger Takes Few Moments Every Morning to
Decide Whether to Feel Outraged, Incensed, or Shocked by Day’s News.
www.theonion.com/blogger-takes-few-moments-every-morning-to-
decide-wheth-1819578040
36 Russell, Bertrand (1903). A Free Man’s Worship. www.philosophicalsociety
.com/archives/a%20free%20man’s%20worship.htm
37 Walker, Shaun (2015). Salutin’ Putin: Inside a Russian Troll House.
Guardian, April 2. www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/02/putin-
kremlin-inside-russian-troll-house
38 Müller, Jan-Werner (2016). What is Populism? Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
39 Lakoff, G. (1996). Moral Politics. University of Chicago Press.
40 Rosenberg, P. (2016). Trump’s Extremism has Deep GOP Roots: The
Correlation Between Corporal Punishment and Voting Republican. Salon,
 

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
September 1. www.salon.com/2016/08/01/trumps_extremism_has_deep_
gop_roots_the_correlation_between_corporal_punishment_and_voting_
republican/
41 Lakoff, George (1996). Moral Politics. University of Chicago Press.
42 Stepanek, Marcia (2016). The Algorithms of Fear. Stanford Innovation
Review, June 14. https://ssir.org/articles/entry/the_algorithms_of_fear
43 Silver, Katie (2017). Anger and Hatred can Make us Feel Happy, Says
Study. BBC News. www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-40900811

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core

Freedom of Attention
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
 The Ground of First Struggle
Technology means constant social revolution.
Marshall McLuhan, The Mechanical Bride
Language has a curious way of sticking around. We still say “the sun
rises,” even though we know it is we who turn into the sun. So it
shouldn’t surprise us that we’ve inherited the largest, most powerful,
and most centralized infrastructure for shaping thought and behavior
in human history, but we still haven’t gotten around to calling it what
it is. We persist in describing these systems as “information” or
“communication” technologies, despite the fact that they are, by
and large, designed neither to inform us nor help us communicate –
at least in any way that’s recognizably human. We beat our breasts
about “fake news” and other varieties of onerous content because it’s
easier than taking aim at the fundamental problems with the medium
itself: that it’s an answer to a question no one ever asked, that its goals
are not our goals, that it’s a machine designed to harvest our attention
wantonly and in wholesale.
The
proliferation
of
ubiquitous,
portable,
and
connected
general-purpose computers has enabled this infrastructure of industri-
alized persuasion to do an end run around all other societal systems
and to open a door directly onto our attentional faculties, on which it
now operates for over a third of our waking lives. In the hands of a few
dozen people now lies the power to shape the attentional habits – the
lives – of billions of human beings. This is not a situation in which the
essential political problem involves the management or censorship of
speech. The total effect of these systems on our lives is not analogous
to that of past communications media. The effect here is much closer
to that of a religion: it’s the installation of a worldview, the habitu-
ation into certain practices and values, the appeals to tribalistic

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
impulses, the hypnotic abdication of reason and will, and the faith in
these omnipresent and seemingly omniscient forces that we trust,
without a sliver of veriﬁcation, to be on our side.
This ﬁerce competition for human attention is creating new
problems of kind, not merely of degree. Via ubiquitous and always
connected interfaces to users, as well as a sophisticated infrastructure
of measurement, experimentation, targeting, and analytics, this global
project of industrialized persuasion is now the dominant business
model and design logic of the internet. To date, the problems of
“distraction” have been minimized as minor annoyances. Yet the
competition for attention and the “persuasion” of users ultimately
amounts to a project of the manipulation of the will. We currently
lack a language for talking about, and thereby recognizing, the full
depth of these problems. At individual levels, these problems threaten
to frustrate one’s authorship of one’s own life. At collective levels,
they threaten to frustrate the authorship of the story of a people and
obscure the common interests and goals that bind them together,
whether that group is a family, a community, a country, or all of
humankind. In a sense, these societal systems have been short-
circuited. In doing so, the operation of the will – which is the basis
of the authority of politics – has also been short-circuited and
undermined.
Uncritical deployment of the human-as-computer metaphor is
today the well of a vast swamp of irrelevant prognostications about
the human future. If people were computers, however, the appropriate
description of the digital attention economy’s incursions upon their
processing capacities would be that of the distributed denial-of-ser-
vice, or DDoS, attack. In a DDoS attack, the attacker controls many
computers and uses them to send many repeated requests to the target
computer, effectively overwhelming its capacity to communicate
with any other computer. The competition to monopolize our atten-
tion is like a DDoS attack against the human will.
In fact, to the extent that the attention economy seeks to
achieve the capture and exploitation of human desires, actions,

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
decisions, and ultimately lives, we may view it as a type of human
trafﬁcking. A 2015 report funded by the European Commission called
“The Onlife Manifesto” does just that: “To the same extent that
organs should not be exchanged on the market place, our attentional
capabilities deserve protective treatment . . . in addition to offering
informed choices, the default settings and other designed aspects of
our technologies should respect and protect attentional capabilities.”
The report calls for paying greater attention “to attention itself as a
[sic] inherent human attribute that conditions the ﬂourishing of
human interactions and the capabilities to engage in meaningful
action.”1
Today, as in Huxley’s time, we have “failed to take into
account” our “almost inﬁnite appetite for distractions.”2 The effect
of the global attention economy – that is, of many of our digital
technologies doing precisely what they are designed to do – is to
frustrate and even erode the human will at individual and collective
levels, undermining the very assumptions of democracy. They guide
us and direct us, but they do not fulﬁll us or sustain us. These are the
“distractions” of a system that is not on our side.
These are our new empires of the mind, and our present relation
with them is one of attentional serfdom. Rewiring this relationship is
a “political” task in two ways. First, because our media are the lens
through which we understand and engage with those matters we have
historically understood as “political.” Second, because they are now
the lens through which we view everything, including ourselves.
“The most complete authority,” Rousseau wrote in A Discourse on
Political Economy, “is the kind that penetrates the inner man, and
inﬂuences his will as much as his actions” (p. 13). This is the kind of
authority that our information technologies – these technologies of
our attention – now have over us. As a result, we ought to understand
them as the ground of ﬁrst political struggle, the politics behind
politics. It is now impossible to achieve any political reform worth
having without ﬁrst reforming the totalistic forces that guide our
attention and our lives.
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Looking to the future, the trajectory is one of ever greater power of the
digital attention economy over our lives. More of our day-to-day
experience stands to be mediated and guided by smaller, faster, more
ubiquitous, more intelligent, and more engaging entry points into the
digital attention economy. As Marc Andreessen, an investor and the
author of Mosaic, the ﬁrst web browser I ever used, said in 2011,
“Software is eating the world.”3 In addition, the amount of monetiz-
able attention in our lives is poised to increase substantially if tech-
nologies such as driverless vehicles, or economic policies such as
Universal Basic Income, come to fruition and increase our amount
of available leisure time.
Persuasion may also prove to be the “killer app” for artiﬁcial
intelligence, or AI. The mantra “AI is the new UI” is informing
much of the next generation interface design currently under way
(e.g. Apple’s Siri, Amazon’s Alexa, or Google Home), and the more
that the vision of computing as intelligent, frictionless assistance
becomes reality, the more the logic and values of the system will be
pushed below the surface of awareness to the automation layer and
rendered obscure to users, or to any others who might want to
question their design. Already, our most common interactions with
some of the most sophisticated AI systems in history occur in
contexts of persuasion, and the application of AI in so-called “pro-
grammatic” advertising is expected to accelerate.4 One major
reason for this is that advertising is where many of the near term
business interests lie. Much of the cutting edge of AI research and
development now takes place within the walls of companies whose
primary business model is advertising – and so, having this existing
proﬁt motive to serve, it’s only natural that their ﬁrst priority
would be to apply their innovations toward growing their business.
For example, one of the ﬁrst projects that Google’s DeepMind
division put their “AlphaGo” system to work on was enhancing
YouTube’s video recommendation algorithm.5 In other words, it
now seems the same intelligence behind the system that defeated
the human world champion at the game Go is sitting on the other

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
side of your screen and showing you videos that it thinks will keep
you using YouTube for as long as possible.
Yet the afﬁnity between advertising and AI extends well
beyond the incidental fact that advertising is the current business
context in which much leading AI development today occurs. In
particular, the problem space of advertising is an extremely good
ﬁt for the capabilities of AI: it combines a mind-boggling multipli-
city of inputs (e.g. contextual, behavioral, and other user signals)
with the laserlike speciﬁcity of a clear, binary goal (i.e. typically the
purchase, or “conversion,” as it’s often called). Perhaps this is why
games have been the other major domain in which artiﬁcial intelli-
gence has been tested and innovated. On a conceptual level, training
an algorithm to play chess or an Atari 2600 game well is quite
similar to training an algorithm to advertise well. Both involve
training an agent that interacts with its environment to grapple with
an enormous amount of unstructured data and take actions based on
that data to maximize expected rewards as represented by a single
variable.
Perhaps an intuition about this afﬁnity between advertising and
algorithmic automation lay behind that almost mystic comment of
McLuhan’s in Understanding Media:
To put the matter abruptly, the advertising industry is a crude
attempt to extend the principles of automation to every aspect of
society. Ideally, advertising aims at the goal of a programmed
harmony among all human impulses and aspirations and endeavors.
Using handicraft methods, it stretches out toward the ultimate
electronic goal of a collective consciousness. When all production
and all consumption are brought into a pre-established harmony
with all desire and all effort, then advertising will have liquidated
itself by its own success.6
It’s probably not useful, or even possible, to ask what McLuhan got
“right” or “wrong” here: in keeping with his style, the observation is
best read as a “probe.” Regardless, it seems clear that he’s making two
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
erroneous assumptions about advertising: (1) that the advertising
system, or any of its elements, has “harmony” as a goal; and (2) that
human desire is a ﬁnite quantity merely to be balanced against other
system dynamics. On the contrary, since the inception of modern
advertising we have seen it continually seek not only to fulﬁll existing
desires, but also to generate new ones; not only to meet people’s needs
and demands, but to produce more where none previously existed.
McLuhan seems to view advertising as a closed system which, upon
reaching a certain threshold of automation, settles into a kind of
socioeconomic homeostasis, reaching a plateau of sufﬁciency via the
(apparently unregulated) means of efﬁciency. Of course, as long as
advertising remains aimed at the ends of continual growth, its tools
of efﬁciency are unlikely to optimize for anything like sufﬁciency or
systemic harmony. Similarly, as long as some portion of human life
manages to confound advertising’s tools of prediction – which
I suggest will always be the case – it is unlikely to be able to optimize
for a total systemic harmony. This is a very good thing, because it lets
us dispense at the outset with imagined, abstracted visions of “auto-
mation” as a generalized type of force (or, even more broadly, “algo-
rithms”), and focus instead on the particular instances of automation
that actually present themselves to us, the most advanced implemen-
tations of which we currently ﬁnd on the battleﬁeld of digital
advertising.
Looking forward, the technologies of the digital attention econ-
omy are also poised to know us ever more intimately, in order to
persuade us ever more effectively. Already, over 250 Android mobile
device games listen to sounds from users’ environments.7 This
listening may one day even extend to our inner environments. In
2015, Facebook ﬁled a patent for detecting emotions, both positive
and negative, from computer and smartphone cameras.8 And in April
2017, at the company’s F8 conference, Facebook researcher Regina
Dugan, a former head of DARPA (the US Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency), took the stage to discuss the company’s develop-
ment of a brain–computer interface.9

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Dugan stresses that it’s not about invading your thoughts – an
important disclaimer, given the public’s anxiety over privacy
violations from social network’s [sic] as large as Facebook. Rather,
“this is about decoding the words you’ve already decided to share
by sending them to the speech center of your brain,” reads the
company’s ofﬁcial announcement. “Think of it like this: You take
many photos and choose to share only some of them. Similarly, you
have many thoughts and choose to share only some of them.”10
The company refused to say whether they plan to use information
collected from the speech center of your brain for advertising
purposes.
We face great challenges today across the full stack of human life: at
planetary, societal, organizational, and individual levels. Success in
surmounting these challenges requires that we give the right sort of
attention to the right sort of things. A major function, if not the
primary purpose, of information technology should be to advance
this end.
Yet for all its informational beneﬁts, the rapid proliferation of
digital technologies has compromised attention, in this wide sense,
and produced a suite of cognitive-behavioral externalities that we are
still only beginning to understand and mitigate. The enveloping of
human life by information technologies has resulted in an informa-
tional environment whose dynamics the global persuasion industry
has quickly come to dominate, and, in a virtually unbounded
manner, has harnessed to engineer unprecedented advances in tech-
niques of measurement, testing, automation, and persuasive design.
The process continues apace, yet already we ﬁnd ourselves entrust-
ing enormous portions of our waking lives to technologies that
compete with one another to maximize their share of our lives,
and, indeed, to grow the stock of life that’s available for them to
capture.
This process will not cross any threshold of intolerability that
forces us to act. It came on, and continues to evolve, gradually. There
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
will be no voice or light from the sky showing how we’ve become
ensconced in a global infrastructure of intelligent persuasion. There
will be no scales dropping from eyes, no Toto pulling back the curtain
to reveal the would-be wizards pulling their levers. There will be no
sudden realization of the gravity and unsustainability of this situation.
Milton Mayer describes how such a gradual process of normal-
ization made even living under the Third Reich feel like no big deal. In
his book They Thought They Were Free, he writes:
But the one great shocking occasion, when tens or hundreds or
thousands will join with you, never comes. That’s the difﬁculty. If
the last and worst act of the whole regime had come immediately
after the ﬁrst and smallest, thousands, yes, millions would have
been sufﬁciently shocked . . . But of course this isn’t the way it
happens. In between come all the hundreds of little steps, some of
them imperceptible, each of them preparing you not to be shocked
by the next . . . And one day, too late, your principles, if you were
ever sensible of them, all rush in upon you. The burden of self-
deception has grown too heavy, and some minor incident, in my
case my little boy, hardly more than a baby, saying “Jewish swine,”
collapses it all at once, and you see that everything, everything, has
changed and changed completely under your nose . . . Now you live
in a world of hate and fear, and the people who hate and fear do not
even know it themselves; when everyone is transformed, no one is
transformed . . . The system itself could not have intended this in
the beginning, but in order to sustain itself it was compelled to go
all the way.11
No designer ever went into design to make people’s lives worse.
I don’t know any software engineers or product managers who want
to undermine the assumptions of democracy. I’ve never met a digital
marketing manager who aims to make society more outraged and
fearful. No one in the digital attention economy wants to be standing
in the lights of our attention. Yet the system, in order to sustain itself,
has been compelled to go all the way.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
This is an intolerable situation. What, then, is to be done? Like
Diogenes to Alexander, we urgently need to look up at these well-
meaning Alexanders of our time and tell them to “stand out of our
light.” Alexander didn’t know he was standing in Diogenes’ light
because it didn’t occur to him to ask. He was focused on his offer
and his goals, not Diogenes’ goals or what was being obscured by his
offer. In the same way, the creators of our digital technologies don’t
know that they’re standing in our light because it doesn’t occur to
them to ask. They have focused on their goals and their desired
effects, rather than our goals or the important “lights” in our lives
they may be obscuring.
For us, responding in the right way means treating the design of
digital technologies as the ground of ﬁrst struggle for our freedom and
self-determination: as the politics behind politics that shapes our
attentional world and directs downstream effects according to its
own ends. Yet this new form of power does not go by the usual names,
it does not play by the usual rules, and indeed those who wield this
power take pains to pretend – despite the strenuous cognitive disson-
ance of such a claim – that they are not wielding any great political
power at all. Yet it is plain that they do.
Ultimately, responding in the right way also means changing
the system so that these technologies are, as they already claim to be,
on our side. It is an urgent task to bring the dynamics and constraints
of the technologies of our attention into alignment with those of our
political systems. This requires a sustained effort to reject the forces
of attentional serfdom, and to assert and defend our freedom of
attention.

1 Floridi, Luciano (ed.) (2015). The Onlife Manifesto. Basle: Springer
International.
2 Huxley, Aldous (1985). Brave New World Revisited. New York, NY:
Harper & Brothers.
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
3 Andreesen, Marc (2011). Why Software is Eating the World. Wall
Street Journal, August 20. www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424053111
903480904576512250915629460
4 Victory, Chris (2017). In 2018, Marketers Will Discover More AI Applications
in Programmatic Advertising. Emarketer. www.emarketer.com/Article/
2018-Marketers-Will-Discover-More-AI-Applications-Programmatic-
Advertising/1016801
5 Simonite, Tom (2016). How Google Plans to Solve Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
MIT Technology Review, March 31. www.technologyreview.com/s/
601139/how-google-plans-to-solve-artiﬁcial-intelligence/. Rowan, David
(2015). DeepMind: Inside Google’s Super-brain. WIRED, June 22. www
.wired.co.uk/article/deepmind
6 McLuhan, Marshall (1994). Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
7 Sapna, Maheshwari (2017). That Game on your Phone may be Tracking what
you’re Watching on TV. New York Times, December 28. www.nytimes
.com/2017/12/28/business/media/alphonso-app-tracking.html
8 Naveh, R. N. (2014). Techniques for Emotion Detection and Content
Delivery. United States Patent Application Publication. http://pdfaiw
.uspto.gov/.aiw?docid=20150242679
9 Statt, Nick (2017). Facebook is Working on a Way to Let you Type with
your Brain. The Verge, April 19. www.theverge.com/2017/4/19/15360798/
facebook-brain-computer-interface-ai-ar-f8-2017
10 Biddle, Sam (2017). Facebook Won’t Say if it Will Use your Brain Activity
for Advertisements. The Intercept, May 22. https://theintercept.com/
2017/05/22/facebook-wont-say-if-theyll-use-your-brain-activity-for-
advertisements/
11 Mayer, Milton (1955). They Thought They Were Free. University of
Chicago Press, pp. 170–171.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
 The Monster and the Bank
A perceptive and critical reader may object here that I’ve given too
much airtime to the problems of the digital attention economy and
not enough to its beneﬁts. They would be quite right. This is by
design. “Why?” they might ask. “Shouldn’t we make an even-handed
assessment of these technologies, and fully consider their beneﬁts
along with their costs? Shouldn’t we take care not to throw out the
baby with the bath water?”
No, we should not. To proceed in that way would grant the
premise that it’s acceptable for our technologies to be adversarial
against us to begin with. It would serve as implicit agreement that
we’ll tolerate design that isn’t on our side, as long as it throws us a few
consolation prizes along the way. But adversarial technology is not
even worthy of the name “technology.” And I see no reason, either
moral or practical, why we should be expected to tolerate it. If any-
thing, I see good reasons for thinking it morally obligatory that we
resist and reform it. Silver linings are the consolations of the disem-
powered, and I refuse to believe that we are in that position relative to
our technologies yet.
The reader might also object, “Are any of these dynamics really
new at all? Does the digital attention economy really pose a funda-
mentally new threat to human freedom?” To be sure, incentives to
capture and hold people’s attention existed long before digital tech-
nologies arose: elements of the attention economy have been present
in previous electric media, such as radio and television, and even
further back we ﬁnd in the word “claptrap” a nice eighteenth-century
analogue of “clickbait.” It’s also true that our psychological biases get
exploited all the time: when a supermarket sets prices that end in .99,
when a software company buries a user-hostile stipulation in a

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
subordinate clause on page 97 of their terms-of-service agreement, or
when a newspaper requires you to call, rather than email, in order to
cancel your subscription. However, these challenges are new: as
I have already argued here, this persuasion is far more powerful and
prevalent than ever before, its pace of change is faster than ever before,
and it’s centralized in the hands of fewer people than ever before.
This is a watershed moment on the trajectory of divesting our
media, that is to say our attentional world, of the biases of print
media, a trajectory that arguably has been in motion since the tele-
graph. But this process is more exponential than it is linear, tracking
as it does the rate of technology change as a whole. The fact that this
can be placed on an existing trajectory means it is more important,
not less, to address.
It’s also wrongheaded to say that taking action to reform the
digital attention economy would be premature because we lack sufﬁ-
cient clarity about the precise causal relationships between particular
designs and particular types of harm. We will never have the sort of
“scientiﬁc” clarity about the effects of digital media that we have,
say, about the effects of the consumption of different drugs. The
technology is changing too fast for research to keep up, its users and
their contexts are far too diverse to allow anything but the broadest
generalizations as conclusions, and the relationships between people
and digital technologies are far too complex to make most research of
this nature feasible at all. Again, though, the assumption behind calls
to “wait and see” is that there’s a scenario in which we’d be willing to
accept design that is adversarial against us in the ﬁrst place. To
demand randomized controlled trials, or similarly rigorous modes of
research, before setting out to rewire the attention economy is akin to
demanding veriﬁcation that the opposing army marching toward you
do, indeed, have bullets in their guns.
Additionally, it’s important to be very clear about what I’m not
claiming here. For one, my argument is in no way anti technology or
anti commerce. This is no Luddite move. The perspective I take, and

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
the suggestions I will make, are in no way incompatible with making
money, nor do they constitute a “brake pedal” on technological
innovation. They’re more of a “steering wheel.” Ultimately, this is a
project that takes seriously the claim, and helps advance the vision,
that technology design can “make the world a better place.”
Also, it’s important to reiterate that I’m not arguing our non-
rational psychological biases are in themselves “bad,” nor that
exploiting them via design is inherently undesirable. As I wrote
earlier, doing so is inevitable, and design can greatly advance users’
interests with these dynamics, when it’s on their side. As Huxley
writes in his 1962 novel Island, “we cannot argue ourselves out of
our basic irrationality – we can only learn to be irrational in a reason-
able way.” Or, as Hegel puts it in Philosophy of Right, “Impulses
should be phases of will in a rational system.”1
Nor, of course, am I arguing that digital technologies somehow
“rewire” our brains, or otherwise change the way we think on a physio-
logical level. Additionally, I’m not arguing here that the main problem
is that we’re being “manipulated” by design. Manipulation is stan-
dardly understood as “controlling the content and supply of informa-
tion” in such a way that the person is not aware of the inﬂuence. This
seems to me simply another way of describing what most design is.
Neither does my argument require for its moral claims the
presence of addiction.2 It’s enough to simply say that when you put
people in different environments, they behave differently. There are
many ways in which technology can be unethical, and can even
deprive us of our freedom, without being “addictive.” Those in the
design community and elsewhere who adopt a default stance of defen-
siveness on these issues often latch on to the conceptual frame of
“addiction” in order to avoid having to meaningfully engage with the
implications of ethically questionable design. This may occur expli-
citly or implicitly (the latter often by analogy to other addiction-
forming products such as alcohol, cigarettes, or sugary foods). As
users, we implicitly buy into these ethically constraining frames
when we use phrases such as “digital detox” or “binge watch.” It’s
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
ironic that comparing our technologies to dependency-inducing
chemicals would render us less able to hold them ethically account-
able for their designs and effects – but this is precisely the case. When
we do so, we give up far too much ethical ground: we help to erect a
straw man argument that threatens to commandeer the wider debate
about the overall alignment of technology design with human goals
and values. We must not confuse clinical standards with moral stand-
ards. Whether irresistible or not, if our technologies are not on our
side, then they have no place in our lives.
It’s also worth noting several pitfalls we should avoid, namely things
we must not do in response to the challenges of the attention
economy. For one, we must not reply that if someone doesn’t like
the choices on technology’s menu, their only option is to “unplug” or
“detox.” This is a pessimistic and unsustainable view of technology,
and one at odds with its very purpose. We have neither reason nor
obligation to accept a relationship with technology that is adversarial
in nature.
We must also be vigilant about the risk of slipping into an overly
moralistic mode. Metaphors of food, alcohol, or drugs are often (though
not always) signals of such overmoralizing. A recent headline in the
British newspaper The Independent proclaims, “Giving your Child a
Smartphone is Like Giving them a Gram of Cocaine, Says Top Addic-
tion Expert.”3 Oxford researchers Andy Przybylski and Amy Orben
penned a reply to that article in The Conversation, in which they wrote,
To fully conﬁrm The Independent’s headline . . . you would need
to give children both a gram of cocaine and a smartphone and
then compare the effects . . . Media reports that compare social
media to drug use are ignoring evidence of positive effects, while
exaggerating and generalising the evidence of negative effects.
This is scaremongering – and it does not promote healthy social
media use. We would not liken giving children sweets to giving
children drugs, even though having sweets for every meal could

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
have serious health consequences. We should therefore not
liken social media to drugs either.4
Similarly, we must reject the impulse to ask users to “just
adapt” to distraction: to bear the burdens of impossible self-
regulation, to suddenly become superhuman and take on the armies
of industrialized persuasion. To do so would be akin to saying, “Thou-
sands of the world’s brightest psychologists, statisticians, and design-
ers are now spending the majority of their waking lives ﬁguring out
how to tear down your willpower – so you just need to have more
willpower.” We must also reject the related temptation to say, “Oh
well, perhaps the next generation will be better adjusted to this atten-
tional warfare by virtue of having been born into it.” That is acquies-
cence, not engagement.
Additionally, education is necessary – but not sufﬁcient – for
transcending this problem. Nor will “media literacy” alone lead us
out of this forest. It’s slightly embarrassing to admit this, but back
when I was working at Google I actually printed out the Wikipedia
article titled “List of Cognitive Biases” and thumb-tacked it on the
wall next to my desk. I thought that having it readily accessible might
help me be less susceptible to my own cognitive limitations. Needless
to say, it didn’t help at all.
Nor can we focus on addressing the negative effects the atten-
tion economy has on children to the exclusion of addressing the
effects it has on adults. This is often the site of the most unrestrained
and counterproductive moralizing. To be sure, there are unique devel-
opmental considerations at play when it comes to children. However,
we should seek not only to protect the most vulnerable members of
society, but also the most vulnerable parts of ourselves.
We also can’t expect companies to self-regulate, or voluntarily
refrain from producing the full effects they’re organizationally struc-
tured and ﬁnancially incentivized to produce. Above all, we must not
put any stock whatsoever in the notion that advancing “mindfulness”
among employees in the technology industry is in any way relevant to
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
or supportive of reforming the dynamics of the digital attention econ-
omy. The hope, if not the expectation, that technology design will
suddenly come into alignment with human well-being if only enough
CEOs and product managers and user experience researchers begin to
conceive of it in Eastern religious terms is as dangerous as it is futile.
This merely translates the problem into a rhetorical and philosophical
frame that is unconnected to the philosophical foundations of West-
ern liberal democracy, and thus is powerless to guide it. The primary
function of thinking and speaking in this way is to gesture in the
direction of morality while allowing enough conceptual haze and
practical ambiguity to permit the impression that one has altered
one’s moral course while not actually having done so.
Perhaps most of all, we cannot put the blame for these problems
on the designers of the technologies themselves. No one becomes a
designer or engineer because they want to make people’s lives worse.
Tony Fadell, the founder of the company Nest, has said,
I wake up in cold sweats every so often thinking, what did we bring
to the world? . . . Did we really bring a nuclear bomb with
information that can – like we see with fake news – blow up
people’s brains and reprogram them? Or did we bring light to people
who never had information, who can now be empowered?5
Ultimately, there is no one to blame. At “fault” are more often
the emergent dynamics of complex multiagent systems rather than
the internal decision-making dynamics of a single individual. As
W. Edwards Deming said, “A bad system will beat a good person every
time.”6 John Steinbeck captured well the frustration we feel when our
moral psychology collides with the hard truth of organizational reality
in The Grapes of Wrath, when tenant farmers are evicted by represen-
tatives of the bank:
“Sure,” cried the tenant men, “but it’s our land . . . We were born on it,
and we got killed on it, died on it. Even if it’s no good, it’s still ours . . .
That’s what makes ownership, not a paper with numbers on it.”

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
“We’re sorry. It’s not us. It’s the monster. The bank isn’t like
a man.”
“Yes, but the bank is only made of men.”
“No, you’re wrong there – quite wrong there. The bank is
something else than men. It happens that every man in a bank hates
what the bank does, and yet the bank does it. The bank is
something more than men, I tell you. It’s the monster. Men made it,
but they can’t control it.”7
The bank isn’t like a man, nor is the technology company, nor is any
other brand nor signiﬁer that we might use to represent the boundary
conditions of these technologies that shape our lives. There is no one to
blame. Knowing this, however, presents us with a choice of two paths.
Do we conjure up an image of a “monster” at whom to direct our
blame, and take a path which, while psychologically rewarding, is
likely to distract from the goal of enacting real change in the real world?
Or do we take the second path, and look head-on at the true nature of
the system, as messy and psychologically indigestible as it seems to be?
The ﬁrst path would seem to lead us toward a kind of digital
mythology, in which we engage in imagined relationships with per-
soniﬁed dynamics of our informational environment, much as the
ancients did with their physical and emotional environments.8 Yet if
we take autonomy seriously, we cannot help but note that in Stein-
beck’s example it is not the displaced farmers, but rather the bankers,
who invoke the idea and, we might say, the brand of the “monster.”
Similarly, in the realm of digital technology, it is less often users than
companies who produce the representations that serve as the primary
psychological and emotional points of connection. In fact, these
brands and representations may be the elements of technology design
over which users have the least amount of control of all. What this
path would entail, then, is acquiescence to a mythology that, while
psychologically satisfying, would be (and in many cases already is)
even more engineered than the products they represent, or than the
decisions that those products are designed to induce.
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
The second path would entail looking the “monster” in the eye,
and seeing it for the complex and multifaceted environment that it is.
Such an approach would be akin to what the philosopher Luciano
Floridi has called “infraethics,” or attention to the infrastructural,
“ﬁrst-order framework of implicit expectations, attitudes, and prac-
tices that can facilitate and promote morally good decisions and
actions.”9 In a sense, the perspective of infraethics views society itself
as a sort of persuasive technology, with a persuasive design goal of
maximizing moral actions.
None of this implies, however, that we can simply stand by and
expect the attention economy to ﬁx itself. Noble mission statements
and inspirational marketing claims can neither produce nor substitute
for right design. “Some of the major disasters of mankind,” writes
Alfred North Whitehead, “have been produced by the narrowness of
men with a good methodology.”10 Similarly, countertechnologies and
calls for players in the attention economy to voluntarily reform may
serve as bandages that temporarily stem some localized bleeding – but
they are not the surgery, the sustainable systemic change, that is
ultimately needed. Besides, they implicitly grant that ﬁrst, fatal
assumption we have already roundly rejected: that it’s acceptable for
the technologies that shape our thinking and behavior to be in an
adversarial relationship against us in the ﬁrst place.
After acknowledging and avoiding these pitfalls, what route
remains? The route in which we take on the task of Herbert Marcuse’s
“great refusal,” which Tim Wu describes in The Attention Merchants
as being “the protest against unnecessary repression, the struggle for
the ultimate form of freedom – ‘to live without anxiety.’”11 The route
that remains is the route in which we move urgently to assert and
defend our freedom of attention.

1 Hegel, Georg W. F. (1820). Elements of the Philosophy of the Right. Berlin.
2 Schull, Natasha D. (2012). Addiction by Design: Machine Gambling in Las
Vegas. Princeton University Press.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
3 Pells, Rachael (2017). Giving your Child a Smartphone is Like Giving them
a Gram of Cocaine, Says Top Addiction Expert. Independent, June 7.
www.independent.co.uk/news/education/education-news/child-smart-
phones-cocaine-addiction-expert-mandy-saligari-harley-street-charter-
clinic-technology-a7777941.html
4 Przybylski, Andy and Orben, Amy (2017). Social Media is Nothing Like
Drugs, Despite all the Horror Stories. The Conversation, June 18. https://
theconversation.com/social-media-is-nothing-like-drugs-despite-all-the-
horror-stories-79382
5 Schwab, Katharine (2017). Nest Founder: “I Wake Up in Cold Sweats
Thinking, What Did We Bring To the World?” Co.Design, July 7. www
.fastcodesign.com/90132364/nest-founder-i-wake-up-in-cold-sweats-
thinking-what-did-we-bring-to-the-world
6 Deming, W. Edward (1993). Deming Four-Day Seminar. Phoenix, Arizona.
7 Steinbeck, John (1939). The Grapes of Wrath.
8 Rader, Emilee and Gray, Rebecca (2015). Understanding User Beliefs
About Algorithmic Curation in the Facebook News Feed. Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems – CHI ’15 (pp. 173–182). New York, NY: ACM Press.
9 Floridi, Luciano (2017). Infraethics – On the Conditions of Possibility of
Morality. Philosophy and Technology, 30 (4), 391–394.
10 Whitehead, Alfred N. (1929). The Function of Reason. Boston, MA: Beacon
Press, 1971.
11 Wu, Tim (2016). The Attention Merchants: The Epic Scramble to Get
Inside Our Heads. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
 Marginal People on
Marginal Time
How can we begin to assert and defend our freedom of attention? One
thing is clear: it would be a sad reimposition of the same technocratic
impulse that gave us the attention economy in the ﬁrst place if we
were to assume that there exists a prescribable basket of “solutions”
which, if we could only apply them faithfully, might lead us out of
this crisis. There are no maps here, only compasses. There are no
three-step templates for revolutions.
We can, however, describe the broad outline of our goal: it’s to
bring the technologies of our attention onto our side. This means
aligning their goals and values with our own. It means creating an
environment of incentives for design that leads to the creation of
technologies that are aligned with our interests from the outset. It
means being clear about what we want our technologies to do for us,
as well as expecting that they be clear about what they’re designed to
do for us. It means expecting our technologies to proceed from a place
of understanding about our own views of who we are, what we’re
doing, and where we’re going. It means expecting our technologies
and their designers to give attention to, to care about, the right things.
If we move in the right direction, then our fundamental understanding
of what technology is for, as the philosopher Charles Taylor has put it,
“will of itself be limited and enframed by an ethic of caring.”1
Drawing on this broad view of the goal, we can start to identify
some vectors of rebellion against our present attentional serfdom.
I don’t claim to have all, or even a representative set, of the answers
here. Nor is it clear to me whether an accumulation of incremental
improvements will be sufﬁcient to change the system; it may be that
some more fundamental reboot of it is necessary. Also, I won’t spend
much time here talking about who in society bears responsibility for

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
putting each form of attentional rebellion into place: that will vary
widely between issues and contexts, and in many cases those answers
aren’t even clear yet.
Prior to any task of systemic reform, however, there’s one
extremely pressing question that deserves as much of our attention
as we’re able to give it. That question is whether there exists a “point of
no return” for human attention (in the deep sense of the term as I have
used it here) in the face of this adversarial design. That is to say, is there
a point at which our essential capacities for life navigation might be so
undermined that we would become unable to regain them and boot-
strap ourselves back into a place of general competence? In other
words, is there a “minimum viable mind” we should take great pains
to preserve? If so, it seems a task of the highest priority to understand
what that point would be, so that we can ensure we do not cross it. In
conceiving of such a threshold – that is, of the minimally necessary
capacities worth protecting – we may ﬁnd a ﬁtting precedent in what
Roman law called the “beneﬁt of competence,” or beneﬁcium compe-
tentiae. In Rome, when a debtor became insolvent and couldn’t pay his
debts, there was a portion of his belongings that couldn’t be taken from
him in lieu of payment: property such as his tools, his personal effects,
and other items necessary to enable a minimally acceptable standard of
living, and potentially even to bootstrap himself back into a position of
thriving. This privileged property that couldn’t be conﬁscated was
called his “beneﬁt of competence.” Absent the “beneﬁt of compe-
tence,” a Roman debtor might have found himself ruined, ﬁnancially
destitute. In the same way, if there is a “point of no return” for human
attention, a “minimum viable mind,” then absent a “beneﬁt of com-
petence” we could also ﬁnd ourselves ruined, attentionally destitute.
And we are not even debtors: we are serfs in the attentional ﬁelds of our
digital technologies. They are in our debt. And they owe us, at absolute
minimum, the beneﬁt of competence.
There are a great number of interventions that could help move
the attention economy in the right direction. Any one could ﬁll a
whole book. However, four particularly important types I’ll brieﬂy
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
discuss here are: (a) rethinking the nature and purpose of advertising,
(b) conceptual and linguistic reengineering, (c) changing the upstream
determinants of design, and (d) advancing mechanisms for account-
ability, transparency, and measurement.
If there’s one necessary condition for meaningful reform of the atten-
tion economy, it’s the reassessment of the nature and purpose of
advertising. It’s certainly no panacea, as advertising isn’t the only
incentive driving the competition for user attention. It is, however,
by far the largest and most deeply ingrained one.
What is advertising for in a world of information abundance? As
I wrote earlier, the justiﬁcation for advertising has always been given
on the basis of its informational merits, and it has historically func-
tioned within a given medium as the exception to the rule of infor-
mation delivery: for example, a commercial break on television or a
billboard on the side of the road. However, in digital media, advertis-
ing now is the rule: it has moved from “underwriting” the content and
design goals to “overwriting” them. Ultimately, we have no concep-
tion of what advertising is for anymore because we have no coherent
deﬁnition of what advertising is anymore.2
As a society, we ought to use this state of deﬁnitional confusion
as the opportunity to help advertising resolve its existential crisis, and
to ask what we ultimately want advertising to do for us. We must be
particularly vigilant here not to let precedent serve as justiﬁcation. As
Thomas Paine wrote in Common Sense, “a long habit of not thinking
a thing wrong, gives it a superﬁcial appearance of being right.”3 The
presence of a series of organizations dedicated to a task can in no sense
be justiﬁcation for that task. (See, e.g., the tobacco industry.) What
forms of attitudinal and behavioral manipulation shall we consider to
be acceptable business models? On what basis do we regard the
wholesale capture and exploitation of human attention as a natural
or desirable thing? To what standards ought we hold the mechanisms
of commercial persuasion, knowing full well that they will inevitably
be used for political persuasion as well?

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
A reevaluation of advertising’s raison d’etre must necessarily
occur in synchrony with the resuscitation of serious advertising
ethics. Advertising ethics has never really guided or restrained the
practice of advertising in any meaningful way: it’s been a sleepy,
tokenistic undertaking. Why has this been so? In short, because
advertisers have found ethics threatening, and ethicists have found
advertising boring. (I know, because I have been both.)
In advertising parlance, the phrase “remnant inventory” refers
to a publisher’s unpurchased ad placements, that is, the ad slots of de
minimis value left over after advertisers have bought all the slots they
wanted to buy. In order to ﬁll remnant inventory, publishers sell it at
extremely low prices and/or in bulk. One way of viewing the ﬁeld of
advertising ethics is as the “remnant inventory” in the intellectual
worlds of advertisers and ethicists alike.
This general disinterest in advertising ethics is doubly surpris-
ing in light of the verve that characterized voices critical of the
emerging persuasion industry in the early to mid twentieth century.
Notably, several of the most prominent early critical voices were
veterans of the advertising industry. In 1928, brand advertising lumi-
nary Theodore MacManus published an article in the Atlantic
Monthly titled “The Nadir of Nothingness” that explained his change
of heart about the practice of advertising: it had, he felt, “mistaken the
surface silliness for the sane solid substance of an averagely decent
human nature.”4 A few years later, in 1934, James Rorty, who had
previously worked for the McCann and BBDO advertising agencies,
penned a missive titled Our Master’s Voice: Advertising, in which he
likewise expressed a sense of dread that advertising was increasingly
violating some fundamental human interest:
[Advertising] is never silent, it drowns out all other voices, and it
suffers no rebuke, for is it not the voice of America? . . . It has taught us
how to live, what to be afraid of, how to be beautiful, how to be loved,
how to be envied, how to be successful . . . Is it any wonder that the
American population tends increasingly to speak, think, feel in terms
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
of this jabberwocky? That the stimuli of art, science, religion are
progressively expelled to the periphery of American life to become
marginal values, cultivated by marginal people on marginal time?5
The prose of these early advertising critics has a certain tone, well
embodied by this passage, that for our twenty-ﬁrst-century ears is
nearly impossible to ignore. It’s a sort of pouring out of oneself, an
expression of disbelief and even offense at the perceived aesthetic and
moral violations of advertising, and it’s further tinged by a plaintive,
interrogative style that reminds us of other Depression-era writers
(James Agee in particular comes to mind). But it reminds me of
Diogenes, too: when he said he thought the most beautiful thing in
the world was “freedom of speech,” the Greek word he used was
parrhesia, which doesn’t just mean “saying whatever you want” – it
also means speaking boldly, saying it all, “spilling the beans,” pouring
out the truth that’s inside you. That’s the sense I get from these early
critics of advertising. In addition, there’s a fundamental optimism in
the mere fact that serious criticism is being leveled at advertising’s
existential foundations at all. Indeed, reading Rorty today requires a
conscious effort not to project our own rear-view cynicism on to him.
While perhaps less poetic, later critics of advertising were able to
more cleanly circumscribe the boundaries of their criticism. One
domain in which neater distinctions emerged was the logistics of adver-
tising: as the industry matured, it advanced in its language and pro-
cesses. Another domain that soon afforded more precise language was
that of psychology. Consider Vance Packard, for instance, whose cri-
tique of advertising, The Hidden Persuaders (1957), had the beneﬁt of
drawing on two decades of advances in psychology research after Rorty.
Packard writes: “The most serious offense many of the depth manipula-
tors commit, it seems to me, is that they try to invade the privacy of our
minds. It is this right to privacy in our minds – privacy to be either
rational or irrational – that I believe we must strive to protect.”6
Packard and Rorty are frequently cited in the same neighborhood
in discussions of early advertising criticism. In fact, the frequency with

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
which they are jointly invoked in contemporary advertising ethics
research invites curiosity. Often, it seems as though this is the case
not so much for the content of their criticisms, nor for their antece-
dence, but for their tone: as though to suggest that, if someone were to
express today the same degree of unironic concern about the founda-
tional aims of the advertising enterprise as they did, and to do so with
as much conviction, it would be too embarrassing, quaint, and opti-
mistic to take seriously. Perhaps Rorty and Packard are also favored for
their perceived hyperbolizing, which makes their criticism easier to
dismiss. Finally, it seems to me that anchoring discussions about
advertising’s fundamental ethical acceptability in the distant past
may have a rhetorical value for those who seek to preserve the status
quo; in other words, it may serve to imply that any ethical questions
about advertising’s fundamental acceptability have long been settled.
My intuition is that the right answers here will involve moving
advertising away from attention and towards intention. That is to say,
in the desirable scenario advertising would not seek to capture and
exploit our mere attention, but rather support our intentions, that is,
advance the pursuit of our reﬂectively endorsed tasks and goals.
Of course, we will not reassess, much less reform, advertising
overnight. Until then, we must staunchly defend, and indeed enhance,
people’s ability to decline the harvesting of their attention. Right now,
the practice currently called “ad blocking” is one of the only ways
people have to cast a vote against the attention economy. It’s one of
the few tools users have if they want to push back against the perverse
design logic that has cannibalized the soul of the web. Some will
object and say that ad blocking is “stealing,” but this is nonsense:
it’s no more stealing than walking out of the room when the televi-
sion commercials come on. Others may say it’s not prudent to escal-
ate the “arms race” – but it would be fantastic if there were anything
remotely resembling an advertising arms race going on. What we have
instead is, on one side, an entire industry spending billions of dollars
trying to capture your attention using the most sophisticated com-
puters in the world, and on the other side . . . your attention. This is
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
more akin to a soldier seeing an army of thousands of tanks and guns
advance upon him, and running into a bunker for refuge. It’s not an
arms race – it’s a quest for attentional survival.
The rightof userstoexercise andprotect theirfreedom of attention
by blocking any advertising they wish should be absolutely defended. In
fact, given the moral and political crisis of the digital attention economy,
the relevant ethical question here is not “Is it okay to block ads?” but
rather, “Is it a moral obligation?” This is a question for companies, too.
Makers of digital technology hardware and software ought to think long
and hard about their obligations to their users. I would challenge them to
come up with any good reasons why they shouldn’t ship their products
with ad blocking enabled by default. Aggressive computational persua-
sion should be opt-in, not opt-out. The default setting should be one of
having control over one’s own attention.
Another important bundle of work involves reengineering the lan-
guage and concepts of persuasive design. This is necessary not only
for talking clearly about the problem, but also for advancing philo-
sophical and ethical work in this area. Deepening the language of
“attention” and “distraction” to cover more of the human will has
been part of my task here. Concepts from neuroethics may also be of
help in advancing the ethics of attention, especially in describing the
problem and the nature of its harms, as in, for example, the concepts
of “brain privacy” or “cognitive liberty.”7
For companies, a key piece of this task involves reengineering
the way we talk about users. Designers and marketers routinely use
terms like “eyeballs,” “funnels,” “targeting,” and other words that are
perhaps not as humanized as they ought to be. The necessary correct-
ive is to ﬁnd more human words for human beings. To put a design
spin on Wittgenstein’s quote from earlier, we might say that the
limits of our language mean the limits of our empathy for users.
Regarding the language of “persuasion” itself, there is a great
deal of clariﬁcation, as well as defragmentation across speciﬁc con-
texts of persuasion, that needs to occur. For example, we could map

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
the language of “persuasive” technologies according to certain ethic-
ally salient criteria, as seen in the ﬁgure below, where the Y axis
indicates the level of constraint the design places on the user and
the X axis indicates the degree of alignment between the user’s goals
and the technology’s goals. Using this framework, then, we could
describe a technology with a low level of goal alignment and a high
degree of constraint as a “Seductive Technology” – for example, an
addictive game that a user wants to stop playing, and afterward regrets
having spent time on. However, if its degree of constraint were very
low, we could instead call it an “Invitational Technology.” Similarly,
a technology that imposes a low degree of constraint on the user and is
highly aligned with their goals, such as a GPS device, would be a
“Directive Technology.” As its constraints on the user increase, it
would become a “Guidance Technology” (e.g. a car’s assisted-parking
or autopilot features) and at even higher levels a “Driving Technol-
ogy” (e.g. a fully autonomous vehicle). This particular framework is
an initial, rough example for demonstrating what I mean, but it
illustrates some of the ways such a project of linguistic and concep-
tual defragmentation could go.
Seduce
Tempt
Degree of 
constraint
Level of goal alignment between user and Persuasive Technology
Invite
Demand
Persuade
Suggest
Drive
Guide
Direct
Clarifying the language of persuasion will have the added bene-
ﬁt of ensuring that we don’t implicitly anchor the design ethics of
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
attention and persuasion in questions of addiction. It’s understand-
able why discussion about these issues has already seized on addiction
as a core problem: the fundamental challenge we experience in a
world of information abundance is a challenge of self-control, and
the petty design habits of the attention economy often target our
reward system, as I described in Chapter 4.
But there are problems with giving too much focus to the
question of addiction. For one, there’s a strict clinical threshold for
addiction, but then there’s also the colloquial use of the term, as
shorthand for “I use this technology more than I want to.” Without
clear deﬁnitions, it’s easy for people to talk past one another. In
addition, if we give too much focus to addiction there’s the risk that
it could implicitly become a default threshold used to determine
whether a design is morally problematic or not. But there are many
ways a technology can be ethically problematic; addiction is just one.
Even designs that create merely compulsive, rather than “addictive,”
behaviors can still pose serious ethical problems. We need to be
especially vigilant about this sort of ethical scope creep in deploy-
ments of the concept of addiction because there are incentives for
companies and designers to lean into it: not only does this set the
ethical threshold at a high as well as vague level, but it also serves to
deﬂect ethical attention away from deeper ethical questions about
goal and value misalignments between the user and the design. In
other words, keeping the conversation focused on questions of addic-
tion serves as a convenient distraction from deeper questions about a
design’s fundamental purpose.
Interventions
with
the
highest
leverage
would
likely
involve
changing the upstream determinants of design. This could come
from, for instance, the development and adoption of alternate corpor-
ate structures that give companies the freedom to balance their
ﬁnancial goals with social good goals, and then offer incentives
for companies to adopt these corporate structures. (For instance,
Kickstarter recently transitioned to become a “beneﬁt corporation,”

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
or B-corp. The writer and Columbia professor Tim Wu has recently
called in the New York Times for Facebook to do the same.)8
Similarly, investors could create a funding environment that disin-
centivizes startup companies from pursuing business models that
involve the mere capture and exploitation of user attention. In add-
ition, companies could be expected (or compelled, if necessary) to
give users a choice about how to “pay” for content online – that is,
with their money or with their attention.
Many of these upstream determinants of design may be
addressed by changes in the policy environment. Policymakers have
a crucial role to play in responding to the crisis of the digital attention
economy. To be sure, they have several headwinds working against
them: the internet’s global nature means local policies can only reach
so far, and the rapid pace of technological change tends to result in
reactive, rather than proactive, policymaking. But one of the strongest
headwinds for policy is the persistence of informational, rather than
attentional, emphases. Most digital media policy still arises out of
assumptions that fail to sufﬁciently account for Herbert Simon’s
observation about how information abundance produces attention
scarcity. Suggestions that platforms be required to tag “fake news,”
for example, would be futile, an endless game of epistemic whack-a-
mole. Initial research has already indicated as much.9 Similarly, in the
European Union, website owners must obtain consent from each user
whose browsing behavior they wish to measure via the use of tracking
“cookies.” This law is intended to protect user privacy and increase
transparency of data collection, both of which are laudable aims when
it comes to the ethics of information management. However, from the
perspective of attention management, the law burdens users with,
say, thirty more decisions per day (assuming they access thirty web-
sites per day) about whether or not to consent to being “cookied” by a
site they may have never visited before, and therefore don’t know
whether or not they can trust. This amounts to a nontrivial strain on
their cognitive load that far outweighs any beneﬁt of giving their
“consent” to have their browsing behavior measured. I place the word
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
“consent” in quotes here because what inevitably happens is that the
“cookie consent” notiﬁcations that websites show to users simply
become designed to maximize compliance: website owners simply
treat the request for “consent” as one more persuasive interaction,
and deploy the same methods of measurement and experimentation
they use to optimize their advertising-oriented design in order to
manufacture users’ consent.
However, governmental bodies are uniquely positioned to host
conversations about the ways new technological affordances relate to
the moral and political underpinnings of society, as well as to advance
existential questions about the nature and purpose of societal insti-
tutions. And, importantly, they are equipped to foster these conversa-
tions in a context that can, in principle, inform and catalyze
corrective action. We can ﬁnd some reasons to be at least cautiously
optimistic in precedents for legal protection of attention enacted in
predigital media. Consider, for instance, anti-spam legislation and “do
not call” registries, which aim to forestall unwanted intrusions into
people’s private spaces. While protections of this nature generally
seek to protect “attention” in the narrow sense – in other words, to
mitigate annoyance or momentary distractions – they can nonethe-
less serve as doorways to protecting the deeper forms of “attention”
that I have discussed here.
What can policy do in the near term that would be high-
leverage? Develop and enforce regulations and/or standards about
the transparency of persuasive design goals in digital media. Set
standards for the measurement of certain sorts of attentional harm –
that is, quantify their “pollution” of the inner environment – and
require that digital media companies measure their effects on these
metrics and report on them periodically to the public. Perhaps even
charge companies something like carbon offsets if they go over a
certain amount – we might call them “attention offsets.” Also worth
exploring are possibilities for digital media platforms that would play
a role analogous to the role public broadcasting has played in televi-
sion and radio.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Advancing accountability, transparency, and measurement in design
is also key. For one, having transparency of persuasive design goals is
essential for verifying that our trust in the creators of our technologies
is well placed. So far, we’ve largely demanded transparency about the
ways technologies manage our information, and comparatively less
about the ways they manage our attention. This has foregrounded
issues such as user privacy and consent, issues which, while import-
ant, have distracted us from demanding transparency about the design
logic – the ultimate why – that drives the products and services we
use. The practical implication of this is that we’ve had minimal and
shaky bases for trust. “Whatever man you meet,” advised the Roman
emperor Marcus Aurelius in his Meditations, “say to yourself at once:
‘what are the principles this man entertains as goods and ills?’”10 This
is good advice not only upon encountering persuasive people, but
persuasive technologies as well. What is Facebook’s persuasive goal
for me? On what basis does YouTube suggest that I watch one video
and not another? What metric does Twitter aim to maximize with my
time use? Why did Amazon build Alexa, after all? Do the goals my
trusted systems have for me align with the goals I have for myself?
There’s nothing wrong with trusting the people behind our technolo-
gies, nor do we need perfect knowledge of their motivations to justiﬁ-
ably do so. Trust always involves taking some risk. Rather, our aim
should be to ﬁnd a way, as the Russian maxim says, to “trust, but
verify.”
Equipping designers, engineers, and businesspeople with effect-
ive “commitment devices” may also be of use. One common example
is that of professional oaths. The oath occupies a unique place in
contemporary society: it’s weightier than a promise, more universal
than a pledge, and more individualized than a creed. Oaths express
and remind us of common ethical standards, provide opportunities for
making
public
commitments
to
particular
values,
and
enable
accountability for action. Among the oaths that are not legally bind-
ing, the best known is probably the Hippocratic Oath, some version of
which is commonly recited by doctors when they graduate from
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
medical school. Karl Popper (in 1970)11 and Joseph Rotblat (in 1995),12
among others, have proposed similar oaths for practitioners of science
and engineering, and in recent years proposals for oaths speciﬁc to
digital technology design have emerged as well.13 So far, none of these
oaths have enjoyed broad uptake. The reasons for this likely include
the voluntary nature of such oaths, as well as the inherent challenge
of agreeing on and articulating common values in pluralistic societies.
But the more signiﬁcant headwinds here may originate in the decon-
textualized ways in which these proposals have been made. If a com-
mitment device is to be adopted by a group, it must carry meaning for
that group. If that meaning doesn’t include some sort of social mean-
ing, then achieving adoption of the commitment device is likely to be
extremely challenging. Most oaths in wide use today depend on some
social structure below the level of the profession as a whole to provide
this social meaning. For instance, mere value alignment among
doctors about the life-saving goals of medicine would not sufﬁce to
achieve continued, widespread recitations of the Hippocratic Oath.
The essential infrastructure for this habit lies in the social structures
and traditions of educational institutions, especially their graduation
ceremonies. Without a similar social infrastructure to enable and
perpetuate use of a “Designer’s Oath,” signiﬁcant uptake seems
doubtful.
It could be argued that a “Designer’s Oath” is a project in search
of a need, that none yet exists because it would bring no new value.
Indeed, other professions and practices seem to have gotten along
perfectly ﬁne without common oaths to bind or guide them. There
is no “Teacher’s Oath,” for example; no “Fireman’s Oath,” no “Car-
penter’s Oath.” It could be suggested that “design” is a level of
abstraction too broad for such an oath because different domains of
design, whether architecture or software engineering or advertising,
face different challenges and may prioritize different values. In tech-
nology design, the closest analogue to a widely adopted “Designer’s
Oath” we have seen is probably the voluntary ethical commitments
that have been made at the organizational level, such as company

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
mottos, slogans, or mission statements. For example, in Google’s
informal motto, “do no evil,” we can hear echoes of that Hippocratic
maxim, primum non nocere (“ﬁrst, do no harm”).14
But primum non nocere does not, in fact, appear in any version
of the Hippocratic Oath. The widespread belief otherwise provides us
with an important signal about the perceived versus the actual value
of oaths in general. A signiﬁcant portion of their value comes not from
their content but from their mere existence: from the societal recog-
nition that a particular practice or profession is oath-worthy, that it
has a signiﬁcant impact on people’s lives such that some explicit
ethical standard has been articulated to which conduct within the
ﬁeld can be held.
Assuming we could address these wider challenges that limit
the uptake of a “Designer’s Oath” within society, what form should
such an oath take? In this space, I can only gesture toward a few of the
main questions – let alone arrive at any clear answers. One of the key
questions is how explicitly such an oath should draw on the example
of the Hippocratic Oath. In my view, the precedent seems appropriate
to the extent that using the metaphor of medicine to talk about design
can help people better understand the seriousness of design. Compar-
ing design to medicine is a useful way of conveying the depth of what
is ultimately at stake. Medicine is also an appropriate metaphor
because, like design, it’s a profession rather than an organization or
institution, which makes it an appropriate level of society at which to
draw a comparison.
However, one limitation of drawing on medicine as a rough
guide to this terrain pertains to the logistics of when and where (and
by whom) a “Designer’s Oath” would be taken. Medical training is
highly systematized, and provides an organizational context for
taking such an oath. A technology designer, by contrast, may have
never had any formal design education – and even those who have,
may have never taken a design ethics class. Even for those who do
take design ethics classes (which are often electives), there is unlikely
to be a moment in them when, as in a graduation ceremony, it would
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
not feel extremely awkward to take an oath. Of course, this assumes
that an educational setting is the appropriate context for such an oath
to begin with. Should we instead look to companies to lead the way? If
so, this would raise the further question about who should be
expected, and not expected, to take the oath (e.g. front-end vs. back-
end designers, hands-on designers vs. design researchers, senior vs.
junior designers, etc.). Finally, there’s also the question of how such
an oath should be written, especially in the digital age. Should it be a
“wiki”-style oath, the product of numerous contributors’ input and
discussion? Or is such a “crowd-sourced” approach, while an appro-
priate way to converge on the provisional truth of a fact (as in Wiki-
pedia), an undesirable way to develop a clear-minded expression of a
moral ideal? In any event, we should expect that any “Designer’s
Oath” receiving wide adoption would continually be iterated and
adapted in response to local contexts and new advances in ethical
thought, as has been the case with the Hippocratic Oath over many
centuries.
As regards the substance of a “Designer’s Oath” – an initial
“alpha” version that can serve as a “minimum viable product”
to build upon – I suggest that a good approach would look some-
thing like the following (albeit far more poetic and memorable than
this):
As someone who shapes the lives of others, I promise to:
Care genuinely about their success;
Understand their intentions, goals, and values as completely as possible;
Align my projects and actions with their intentions, goals, and values;
Respect their dignity, attention, and freedom, and never use their own
weaknesses against them;
Measure the full effect of my projects on their lives, and not just those
effects that are important to me;
Communicate clearly, honestly, and frequently my intentions and
methods; and
Promote their ability to direct their own lives by encouraging reﬂection on
their own values, goals, and intentions.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
I won’t attempt here to justify each element I’ve included in this
“alpha” version of the oath, but will only note that: (a) it assumes a
patient-centered, rather than an agent-centered, perspective; (b) in keep-
ing with the theme of this inquiry, it emphasizes ethical questions
related to the management of attention (broadly construed) rather than
the management of information; (c) it explicitly disallows design that is
consciously adversarial in nature (i.e. having aims contrary to those of
the user), which includes a great deal of design currently operative in the
attention economy; (d) it goes beyond questions of respect or dignity to
include an expectation of care on the part of the designer; and (e) it views
measurement as a key way of operationalizing that care in the context
of digital technology design (as I will further discuss below).
Measurement is also key. In general, our goal in advancing measure-
ment should be to measure what we value, rather than valuing what
we already measure. Ethical discussions about digital advertising
often assume that limiting user measurement is axiomatically desir-
able due to considerations such as privacy or data protection. These
are indeed important ethical considerations, and if we conceive of the
user–technology interaction in informational terms then such conclu-
sions may very well follow. Yet if we take an attention-centric per-
spective, as I have described above, there are ways in which limiting
user measurement may complicate the ethics of a situation, and
possibly even actively hinder it.
Greater measurement (of the right things) is in principle a good
thing. Measurement is the primary means designers and advertisers
have of attending to speciﬁc users, and as such it can serve as the
ground on which conversations, and if necessary interventions, per-
taining to the responsibilities of designers may take place.
One key ethical question we should be asking with respect to
user measurement is not merely “Is it ethical to collect more infor-
mation about a user?” (though of course in some situations that is the
relevant question), but rather, “What information about the user are
we not measuring, that we have a moral obligation to measure?”
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
What are the right things to measure? One is potential vulner-
abilities on the part of users. This includes not only signals that a user
might be part of some vulnerable group (e.g. children or the mentally
disabled), but also signals that a user might have particularly vulner-
able mechanisms. (For example, a user may be more susceptible to
stimuli that draw them into addictive or akratic behavior.) If we deem
it appropriate to regulate advertising to children, it is worth asking
why we should not similarly regulate advertising that is targeted to
“the child within us,” so to speak.
Another major area where measurement ought to be advanced
is in the understanding of user intent. The way in which search
queries function as signals of user intent, for instance, has played a
major role in the success of search engine advertising. Broadly, signals
of intent can be measured in forward-looking forms (e.g. explicitly
expressed in search queries or inferred from user behavior) as well as
backward-looking forms (e.g. measures of regret, such as web page
“bounce rates”). However, the horizon of this measurement of intent
should not stop at low-level tasks: it should include higher and longer-
term user goals as well. The creators of technologies often justify their
design decisions by saying they’re “giving users what they want.”
However, this may not be the same as giving users “what they want
to want.” To do that, they need to measure users’ higher goals.
Other things worth measuring include the negative effects tech-
nologies might have in users’ lives – for example, distraction or
decreases in their overall well-being – as well as an overall view of
the net beneﬁt that the product is bringing to users’ lives (as with
Couchsurﬁng.com’s “net orchestrated conviviality” metric).15 One
way to begin doing this is by “measuring the mission” – beginning
to operationalize in metrics the company’s mission statement or
purpose for existing, which is something nearly every company has
but which hardly any company actually measures their success
toward. Finally, companies can measure the broader effects of their
advertising efforts on users – not merely those effects that pertain to
the advertiser’s persuasive goals.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Ultimately, none of these interventions – greater transparency
of persuasive design goals, the development of new commitment
devices, or advancements in measurement – is enough to create deep,
lasting change in the absence of new mechanisms to make users’
voices heard in the design process. If we construe the fundamental
problem of the attentional economy in terms of attentional labor –
that as users we’re not getting sufﬁcient value for our attentional
labor, and the conditions of that labor are unacceptable – we could
conceive of the necessary corrective as a sort of “labor union” for the
workers of the attention economy, which is to say, all of us. Or, we
might construe our attentional expenditure as the payment of an
“attention tax,” in which case we currently ﬁnd ourselves subject to
attentional taxation without representation. But however we con-
ceive the nature of the political challenge, its corrective must ultim-
ately consist of user representation in the design process. Token
inclusion is insufﬁcient: users need to have a real say in the design,
and real power to effect change. At present, users may have partial
representation in design decisions by way of market or user experi-
ence research. However, the horizon of concern for such work typic-
ally terminates at the question of business value; it rarely raises
substantive political or ethical considerations, and never functions
as anything remotely like an externally transparent accountability
mechanism. Of course, none of this should surprise us at all, because
it’s exactly what the system so far has been designed to do.
I’m often asked whether I’m optimistic or pessimistic about the
potential for reform of the digital attention economy. My answer is
that I’m neither. The question assumes the relevant task before us is
one of prediction rather than action. But that perspective removes our
agency; it’s too passive.
Some might argue that aiming for reform of the attention econ-
omy in the way I’ve described here is too ambitious, too idealistic, too
utopian. I don’t think so – at least, it’s no more ambitious, idealistic,
or utopian than democracy itself. Finally, some might say “it’s too
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
late” to do any or all of this. At that, I can only shake my head and
laugh. Digital technology has only just gotten started. Consider that it
took us 1.4 million years to put a handle on the stone hand axe. The
web, by contrast, is fewer than 10,000 days old.

1 Taylor, Charles (1992). The Ethics of Authenticity. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
2 Richards, Jef I. and Curran, Catharine M. (2002). Oracles on “Advertising”:
Searching for a Deﬁnition. Journal of Advertising, 31 (2), 63–77.
3 Paine, Thomas (1776). Common Sense.
4 MacManus, Theodore F. (1928). The Nadir of Nothingness. Atlantic
Monthly, 19 (May), 594–608.
5 Rorty, James (1934). Our Master’s Voice: Advertising. New York: John
Day. Rorty’s title refers to His Master’s Voice, the famous painting of a
terrier listening to his dead master’s voice being replayed on a wind-up
gramophone. The phrase later became the name of a British record
company; today, both the phrase and the image persist in the name and
logo of the entertainment retail company HMV.
6 Packard, Vance (1957). The Hidden Persuaders. London: Longmans,
Green, p. 159.
7 Levy, Neil (2007). Neuroethics. Cambridge University Press.
8 Manjoo, Farhad and Roose, Kevin (2017). How to Fix Facebook? We Asked
9 Experts. New York Times, September 11. www.nytimes.com/2017/10/
31/technology/how-to-ﬁx-facebook-we-asked-9-experts.html
9 Schwartz, Jason (2017). Tagging Fake News on Facebook Doesn’t Work,
Study Says. Politico, September 11. www.politico.com/story/2017/09/11/
facebook-fake-news-fact-checks-242567
10 Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 8.14.
11 Popper, Karl (1970). The Moral Responsibility of the Scientist. Induction,
Physics and Ethics (pp. 329–336). Dordrecht: Springer.
12 Rotblat, Joseph (1995). Nobel Lecture. Remember your Humanity. The
Nobel Foundation. www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/
1995/rotblat-lecture.html
13 Designer’s Oath. http://designersoath.com/index.html
14 Hippocrates, Of the Epidemics, Book I, section 11.5.
15 Edelman, Joe. www.Couchsurﬁng.com

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
 The Brightest Heaven
of Invention
O for a Muse of ﬁre, that would ascend / The brightest heaven of
invention
Shakespeare, Henry V
Let me tell you about two of my favorite YouTube videos. In the ﬁrst,
a father and his family are in their backyard celebrating his birthday.
One person hands him his present, and, seeing that someone has
begun video-recording the moment, he senses there’s something
special about it. He takes his time opening the gift, cracking small
jokes along the way. He removes the wrapping paper to ﬁnd a box
containing a pair of sunglasses. But these sunglasses aren’t meant for
blocking out the sunlight: they’re made to let people like him, the
colorblind, see the colors of the world. He reads the details on the back
of the box longer than is necessary, drawing out the process as though
trying to delay, as though preparing himself for an experience he
knows will overwhelm him. He takes the black glasses out, holds
them up, and silently examines them from all directions. Then some-
one off-camera exclaims, “Put them on!” He does, then immediately
looks away from the camera. He’s trying to retain his composure, to
take this in his stride. But he can’t help jolting between everyday
items now, because to him they’ve all been transﬁgured. He’s seeing
for the ﬁrst time the greenness of the grass, the blueness of the sky,
the redness of his wife’s poinsettias and her lips, ﬁnally, and the full
brownness of the kids’ hair and the ﬂush peach paleness of their faces
as they smile and come to him and hug him, his eyes ﬁlling with
water as he keeps repeating over and over, “Oh, wow. Oh, man.”
The second video opens with a top-down view of Earth, over
which the International Space Station is hurtling. A piano plays as

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
we fade into the ISS’s observation dome, the Cupola, where a mus-
tached man, the Canadian astronaut Chris Hadﬁeld, ﬂoats and stares
down at Earth, seemingly lost in reﬂection. The piano downbeats on
a minor chord as he turns to the camera and sings the opening line of
David Bowie’s song Space Oddity: “Ground control to Major Tom.”
He continues singing as he ﬂoats down a corridor of wires and lens
ﬂares. Then a guitar appears in his hands as laptops ﬂoat around him,
seeming to balance on their wires like cobras. He sings, “Lock your
Soyuz hatch and put your helmet on.” (In Bowie’s version the line is
“Take your protein pills and put your helmet on”; Soyuz is the
rocket that today takes astronauts to the ISS.) We see Hadﬁeld
singing in his padded, closet-sized quarters, singing as he ﬂoats
through other shafts and rooms, returning time and again to the
Cupola, bright with the light of Earth. He comes to the bridge: “Here
am I ﬂoating in my tin can / Last glimpse of the world / Planet Earth
is blue, and there’s nothing left to do.” (The original line, in Bowie’s
version, is “there’s nothing I can do.”) I don’t remember when astro-
nauts started to be able to use the internet in space, but in any case
this video made me realize that the World Wide Web isn’t just world-
wide anymore.
At its best, technology opens our doors of perception, inspires
awe and wonder in us, and creates sympathy between us. In the 1960s,
some people in San Francisco started walking around wearing a button
that read, “Why haven’t we seen a photo of the earth from space yet?”
They realized that this shift in perception – what’s sometimes called
the “overview effect” – would occasion a shift in consciousness. They
were right: when the ﬁrst photo of Earth became widely available, it
turned the ground of nature into the ﬁgure, and enabled the environ-
mental movement to occur. It allowed us all to have the perspective of
astronauts, who were up in space coining new terms like “earthlight”
and “earthrise” from the surface of the Moon. (Though I can’t seem to
ﬁnd the reference, I think it might have been the comedian Norm
MacDonald who said, “It must have been weird to be the ﬁrst people
ever to say, ‘Where’s the earth?’ ‘Oh, there it is.’”)

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
What’s needed now is a similar shift – an overview effect,
ﬁnding the earthlight – for our inner environment. Who knows,
maybe space exploration will play a role this time, too. After all, it
did go far in giving us a common goal, a common purpose, a common
story during a previous turbulent time. As the mythologian Joseph
Campbell said, “The modern hero deed must be that of questing to
bring to light again the lost Atlantis of the coordinated soul.”1 This is
true at both individual and collective levels.
In order to rise to this challenge, we have to lean into the
experiences of awe and wonder. (Interestingly, these emotions, like
outrage, also tend to go “viral” in the attention economy.) We have to
demand that these forces to which our attention is now subject start
standing out of our light. This means rejecting the present regime of
attentional serfdom. It means rejecting the idea that we’re powerless,
that our angry impulses must control us, that our suffering must
deﬁne us, or that we ought to wallow in guilt for having let things
get this bad. It means rejecting novelty for novelty’s sake and disrup-
tion for disruption’s sake. It means rejecting lethargy, fatalism, and
narratives of us versus them. It means using our transgressions to
advance the good. This is not utopianism. This is imagination. And,
as anyone with the slightest bit of imagination knows, “imaginary” is
not the opposite of “real.”
Future generations will judge us not only for our stewardship of
the outer environment, but of the inner environment as well. Our
current crisis does not only come in the form of rising global tempera-
tures, but also in our injured capacities of attention. Our mission,
then, is not only to reengineer the world of matter, but also to reen-
gineer our world so that we can give attention to what matters.
Today, the right sort of redesign is not yet in fashion. My
purpose here has been to identify and advance it as best I could in
the time and space I had. I have also sought to encourage and guide the
attention of others who share my deep concern about this vast infra-
structure of technological persuasion we have inherited – but who,
also like me, take solace in encountering others on this road who see
    

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
the same problems, and respond to them with the same vigor of
inquiry that I have been fortunate enough to enjoy in the writing of
this book.
In order to do anything that matters, we must ﬁrst be able to
give attention to the things that matter. It’s my ﬁrm conviction, now
more than ever, that the degree to which we are able and willing to
struggle for ownership of our attention is the degree to which we
are free.

1 Campbell, Joseph (2008). The Hero with a Thousand Faces (vol. ).
New World Library.

  
https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Acknowledgments
Deepest thanks are owed to my wife, brothers, and parents for many
years of love and encouragement. I wish to speciﬁcally acknowledge
the inﬂuence of my father, Dr. Rodney Don Williams, a man to whose
goodness and wisdom I daily aspire.
I am grateful to many friends, mentors, and colleagues who have
helped me develop the ideas contained herein. For essential guidance
during the course of my doctoral research, I thank Professor Luciano
Floridi and the Digital Ethics Lab at the University of Oxford. I also
thank Professor Julian Savulescu and the Oxford Uehiro Centre for
Practical Ethics for ongoing feedback on my work. I am also deeply
indebted to my friends at Balliol College for countless evenings of
lively and well-lubricated debate, in particular Joshua Melville, Achas
Burin, and Thomas Møller-Nielsen. I have also greatly beneﬁted from
my ongoing alliance with the global Time Well Spent community, in
particular conversations with Tristan Harris, Joe Edelman, Max
Stossel, and Anika Saigal.
I have also beneﬁted from important conversations with many
other formidable minds, among them Victoria Nash, William Dutton,
Mariarosaria Taddeo, Tim Wu, Burkhard Schafer, Ralph Schroeder,
Vili Lehdonvirta, Eric Meyer, Heather Ford, the DPhil seminars at the
Oxford Internet Institute, Roger Crisp, Janet Radcliffe-Richards,
Regina Rini, Jeff McMahan and the Oxford Moral Philosophy
Seminars, the Oxford Applied Ethics Work in Progress Seminar,
Anders Sandberg, Carissa Véliz, Fay Niker, Wael Ghonim, Benson
Dastrup, Constantin Vică, and Emilian Mihailov.
This book would never have existed without the
encouragement of Ernesto Oyarbide, who informed me about the
Nine Dots Prize and nudged me to apply. I am grateful to all those
who conceived and carried out the inaugural instance of this unique

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
competition, including: Peter Kadas and the Kadas Prize Foundation;
Jane Tinkler; Simon Goldhill and the Centre for Research in the Arts,
Social, Sciences, and Humanities at the University of Cambridge; the
Nine Dots Prize board members; and Caitlin Allen and Laura Curtis at
Riot Communications.
Finally, I thank Chris Harrison and Sarah Payne at Cambridge
University Press for their astute editorial guidance, as well as Crystal
Lin for her support with elements of the research. I am also grateful to
the Oxford Practical Ethics Blog, as well as Quillette Magazine, in
whose pages I developed earlier versions of some ideas that appear in
this book.


https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Further Reading
Crawford, Matthew (2015). The World Beyond Your Head: How to Flourish in
an Age of Distraction. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Eyal, Nir (2014). Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products. London: Portfolio
Penguin.
Huxley, Aldous (1932). Brave New World. London: Chatto & Windus.
Huxley, Aldous (1985). Brave New World Revisited. New York, NY: Harper &
Brothers.
James, William (1983). The Principles of Psychology. Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research (vol. ). New York: Henry Holt.
Levy, Neil (2007). Neuroethics: Challenges for the Twenty-ﬁrst Century. Cambridge
University Press.
Müller, Jan-Werner (2016). What is Populism? Philadelphia, PA: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Nussbaum, Martha (2016). Anger and Forgiveness: Resentment, Generosity, and
Justice. Oxford University Press
Orwell, George (1949). 1984. London: Secker & Warburg.
Postman, Neil (1987). Amusing Ourselves to Death. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1755; 2009). A Discourse on Political Economy. Oxford
University Press.
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1762; 2009). The Social Contract. Oxford University Press.

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
Index
Abilene Paradox, 48
Abilene, Texas, 69
ad blocking, 111–112
addiction, 113–114
viewing or not viewing technology as, 99
advertising, 28, 79
artiﬁcial intelligence, 90–92
digital, 29–32
ethics of digital advertising, 121
internet, 28
native advertising, 32
reassessment of nature and purpose,
108–112
search queries as signals of user intent,
122
Aesop, 26–27
Age of Attention, 16, 23
challenges of, 20
enforcing boundaries, 24
akrasia (weakness of will), 64
Alexa, 117
Alexander the Great, 2–3
Amazon Inc., 90, 117
analytics systems, 32
Andreessen, Marc, 90
Anger and Forgiveness, 74–75
Apple Inc., 90
Arendt, Hannah, 71
Aristotle, 27, 70, 74
artiﬁcial intelligence
games, 91
persuasion, 90–92
attention, 10, 29
capacities for prediction, 69
competition over, 88–89
deﬁning, 44–47
offsets, 116
spotlight of, 45
attention economy, 33–34, 58, 62
adversarial nature of technology, 97
as akin to DDoS attack, 88
conceptualizing, 88–89
democracy, 68, 80, 89
elements in previous eras, 97
increasing intrusiveness, 90
listening devices, 92
media literacy, 101
monetization of users, 123
moral outrage, 71–77, 80, 100
necessity of action, 98
predigital, 97–98
reassessment of advertising, 108
rewiring human relationship to, 89
technology and reasoning, 79
voluntary reform, 104
Attention Merchants, The, 104
Aurelius, Marcus, 117
Blue State Digital, 63
Bose, 23
boundaries, 21–24
Braudy, Leo, 59
Brave New World, 10
Brexit, 78
browser “cookie”, 31–32
Cecil the Lion, 72–73, 75
China, 52
choice architect, 21
Churchill, Winston, 28, 36
clickbait, 33–34, 43, 52
competence, beneﬁt of, 107
consent, 115
Coremetrics, 32
Crawford, Matthew, 21, 51
cybernetics, 48
Daily You, The, 31
DeepMind, 90
Deming, W. Edwards, 102
democracy, 80, 94, 102
distractions of the attention economy, 68
values of, 61
design
and distraction, 56
goals of, 8, 19

https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
lack of user representation in process,
123
persuasion, 27–29, 34–35, 51
Designer’s Oath, 118–121
digital advertising, 28, 31, 53, 92
ethics, 121
growth, 29
Diogenes, 1–3, 21–22, 43–44, 110
Discourse on Political Economy, A, 89
distraction, 10, 18, 45, 55, 65, 88
appetite for, 46, 89
effect of, 50–51
epistemic, 68–69
existential, 56
functional, 50–51
IQ scores, 69
obscured “starlight”, 56
protection against, 116
technological, 44
Dugan, Regina, 92
Dylan, Bob, 50
education, 101
electoral college system, 78
engagement metrics, 32
English, 36
European Union, 115
Eyal, Nir, 34
Facebook, 36, 53, 57, 73, 92, 117
emotional contagion experiment, 62–63
Secret Mood Manipulation Experiment
(The Atlantic), 63
Fadell, Tony, 102
fake news, 69, 87, 102, 115
Floridi, Luciano, 104
Franck, Georg, 46
Frankfurt, Harry, 20, 68
freedom, 46
Frenzy of Renown, The, 59
Fricker, Miranda, 68
games, 92
as well positioned for application of AI, 90
Ghonim, Wael, 79
“Gift of a Common Tongue, The”, 36
goals
engagement, 8–9
human, 7
of technology designers, 10
Google, 7, 29, 32, 36, 90, 101, 119
Gmail, 51
Google Analytics, 32
Grapes of Wrath, The, 102
Hammerbacher, Jeff, 30
Harris, Tristan, 33
Hearphones, 23
Hegel, G. W. F., 99
Hewlett-Packard, 69
Hidden Persuaders, The, 110
Hooked: How to Build Habit Forming
Products, 34
human-as-computer metaphor, 88
Huxley, Aldous, 10–11, 23, 99
Idiocracy, 61
information, 12–16
abundance of, 15–16
Information Age, 12
information management
vs attention management, 115
information technologies, 93
assessing the design logic, 117
dependency, 19
effects of, 87
persuasive design of, 87, 93–94
infraethics, 104
injustice, epistemic, 68
Innis, Harold, 10
internet
advertising, 28
attention management, 35–36
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 32
Island, 99
“iTrainer”, 18–20, 22
James, William, 44, 47, 56, 64
Johnson, Clay, 63
Judge, Mike, 61
Kahneman, Daniel, 30
Korsgaard, Christine, 70
Lakoff, George, 77–78
language, humanizing of, 112
leisure, 70–71
Levy, Neil, 24, 56
Lincoln, Abraham, 75
List of Cognitive Biases, 101


https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
MacManus, Theodore, 109
Mayer, Milton, 94
McLuhan, Marshall, 91–92
Meditations, 117
military rule, approval of, 61
Mill, John Stuart, 46
mindfulness, 101
mob justice, 75–76
moral outrage, 71–77
personal anxiety, 76
Müller, Jan-Werner, 77–79
Nadir of Nothingness, the, 109
native advertisements, 32
Neuroethics, 24, 56
Nielsen surveys, 31
Nineteen Eighty-Four, 10
Nussbaum, Martha, 74–75, 79
oaths, 117–121
Onlife Manifesto, the, 89
Orwell, George, 10
Our Master’s Voice: Advertising, 109
Packard, Vance, 110
Pask, Gordon, 48
perception
shift in due to overview effect, 125–126
persuasion, 27–29, 37, 87, 112–114
artiﬁcial intelligence, 90–92
information technology, 93–94
pettiness, 57–58
narcissism, 59
Pieper, Joseph, 70
polarization, political
as erosion of shared identity, 64
Political Economy, 62
political information, 51–53
populism, 78–79
Postman, Neil, 10–11
Principles of Psychology, The, 64
propaganda, 52
“Regrets of the Dying”, 8
remnant inventory, 109
Republic, The, 76
rhetoric, 27
Roberts, Margaret, 52
Roethke, Theodore, 71
Rorty, James, 109–111
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 20, 47–48, 62, 64–65,
77, 89
safe spaces, 2
self-regulation, 21–24
shared identity, 64–65
Simon, Herbert, 13
slot machine effect, 35
Sloterdijk, Peter, 21
Smith, Adam, 57, 60
Social Contract, The, 21, 77
Socrates, 76
Steinbeck, John, 102
Taylor, Charles, 64, 106
technology
aligning design goals with human goals,
106
blame for effects of, 102–104
critiquing the comparison to drugs,
100
debating the beneﬁts of, 97–98
reason for existence of, 7
Tesla, Nikola, 23
Tetris, 15, 17–18, 56
Theory of Moral Sentiments, The,
57
They Thought They Were Free, 94
Trump, Donald J., 52–53, 58
Turow, Joseph, 31
Tversky, Amos, 30
Twitch, 60
Twitter, 52, 58, 73
Understanding Media, 91
United Kingdom, 61, 63, 78
United States, 35, 52–53, 61, 71,
78
Universal Basic Income, 90
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Article 21, 47
wantonness, 68
Wealth of Nations, 60
Weibo, 60
Weinstein, Lauren, 63, 74
What is Populism?, 77
will, 47–48
weakness of (akrasia), 64
Wu, Tim, 104, 115
You Must Change Your Life, 22
YouTube, 59–60, 90, 117, 125
Zuckerberg, Mark, 36


https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/3F8D7BA2C0FE3A7126A4D9B73A89415D
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. 
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 82.132.242.7, on 26 Aug 2018 at 09:40:12, subject to the Cambridge Core
